 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was heldin the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal ReserveSystem in Washington on Tuesday, May 7, 1957, at 10:00 a.m.PRESENT Mr. Martin, ChairmanMr. AllenMr. BalderstonMr. BryanMr. LeedyMr. MillsMr. RobertsonMr. ShepardsonMr. VardamanMr. WilliamsMr. Treiber, Alternate for Mr. HayesMessrs. Fulton, Irons, Leach, and Mangels,Alternate Members of the Federal OpenMarket CommitteeMessrs. Erickson, Johns, and Deming, Presidentsof the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, St.Louis, and Minneapolis, respectivelyMr. Riefler, SecretaryMr. Thurston, Assistant SecretaryMr. Sherman, Assistant SecretaryMr. Hackley, General CounselMr. Solomon, Assistant General CounselMr. Thomas, EconomistMessrs. Atkinson, Bopp, Marget, Mitchell, Tow,and Young, Associate EconomistsMr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market AccountMr. Carpenter, Secretary, Board of GovernorsMr. Koch, Assistant Director, Division of Re-search and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Miller, Chief, Government Finance Section,Division of Research and Statistics, Boardof GovernorsMr. Roosa, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bankof New YorkMr. Gaines, Manager, Securities Department,Federal Reserve Bank of New York 5/7/57Mr. Daane, Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of Richmond; Messrs. Balles andEinzig, Assistant Vice Presidents, Fed-eral Reserve Banks of Cleveland and SanFrancisco, respectively; Messrs. Ellis,Parsons, and Coldwell, Directors of Re-search, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston,Minneapolis, and Dallas, respectively;and Mr. Robertson, Financial Economist,Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.Upon motion duly made and seconded,and by unanimous vote, the minutes of themeetings of the Federal Open Market Com-mittee held on April 16 and 24, 1957, wereapproved.Upon motion duly made and seconded,and by unanimous vote, Mr. Merritt Shermanwas elected an Assistant Secretary of theFederal Open Market Committee to serveuntil the election of his successor at thefirst meeting of the Committee after Feb-ruary 28, 1958, with the understanding thatin the event of the discontinuance of hisofficial connection with the Board ofGovernors of the Federal Reserve System hewould cease to have an official connectionwith the Federal Open Market Committee.Before this meeting there had been distributed to the membersof the Committee a report prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of NewYork covering open market operations during the period April 16through May 1, 1957, as well as a supplementary report covering com-mitments executed May 2 through May 6, 1957. Copies of both reportshave been placed in the files of the Committee.Mr. Rouse reported that a fairly steady degree of restrainthad been maintained in the money and securities markets since the lastmeeting in spite of the aberrations that had affected bank reserves. 5/7/57 -3-One of these was the unexpectedly large increase in float resultingfrom the strike of Railway Express Agency employees. The other wasthe unanticipated reduction in the Treasury's balance at the ReserveBanks which had had an effect upon bank reserves over a period of twoor three days. Currently, the money market was quite tight, a condi-tion that had been confirmed by several weeks of pressure on the marketprior to the Treasury refunding. The Treasury's announcement of a re-funding offering for the $4,155 million of 1-5/8 per cent notesmaturing on May 15 had been taken by the market with neither surprisenor disappointment at the terms offered, Mr. Rouse said, but it wasexpected that there would be substantial attrition. On the otherhand, the bidding for Treasury bills in the weekly auction yesterdayresulted in an average yield of 2.91 per cent and this made the 3-1/2per cent eleven-month certificates of indebtedness offered in exchangefor the maturing securities look quite attractive. There was now somefeeling in the market that attrition would be no greater than had beenanticipated earlier (20-25 per cent) and that it might be somewhatless.As far as the next period was concerned, Mr. Rouse said thatthe Account Management was faced with a fairly even reserve situationexcept for the expansion that was anticipated in float in the middleof the month.Upon motion duly made and seconded,and by unanimous vote, the open markettransactions during the period April 16through May 6, 1957, were approved,ratified, and confirmed. 5/7/57 -4-At Chairman Martin's request Mr. Young made a statement onthe economic situation as follows:Over all, the movement of economic activity in thiscountry continues sidewise but with a slight upward tiltfor both GNP and prices. In industrial countries abroad,the most recent information points to resumed advance inactivity and up-creep in prices.Domestically, modest further rise in the average whole-sale prices has reflected mainly a seasonal rise in farmproducts and foods which are now about 3 per cent higherthan a year ago. Wholesale prices of industrial goods remainstable, both for fabricated and finished items and for basicmaterials. After a sharp decline, the price of steel scraphas leveled off and strengthened some recently; the priceof nonferrous metal scrap has shown some strength, andprices of other basic materials have shown only small change.Trade speculation on the expected increase in steel pricesthis summer continues active, with $7 a ton at the lowerrange of estimates, but hedge buying of steel does notappear particularly noteworthy. Consumer prices for Aprilare expected to show some further advance.For April, the Board's index of industrial productionis estimated to be down one point from March to 145. Out-put of steel ingots, sheet, auto assemblies, zinc, andpetroleum was down. Output of producers' equipment andordinance, which currently have a weight of about one-thirdin the index, was up. Output of nondurable industries wasabout maintained.Manufacturers' sales in March, while off slightly fromFebruary, were still up 6.5 per cent over a year ago, witha good part of the increase in prices. One element ofstrength in first quarter industrial sales was a 9 per centfurther rise in exports to a $27 billion annual rate. Whileagricultural exports were at a high level, the increase inforeign shipments was largely in petroleum and manufacturedproducts.Manufacturers' inventories rose about $850 million bookvalue in the first quarter, but distributors' inventories de-clined by nearly $350 million. Since higher prices were afactor in the manufacturers' inventory accumulation, it nowappears that there was a significant decline over-all inphysical inventory holdings of business in contrast to afairly substantial rise in the preceding quarter and over 5/7/57the preceding two years. A large part of the inventoryexpansion of the past year has been in work-in-processin equipment and ordnance industry, so that inventory-sales ratios elsewhere seem to continue on the prudentside. With a more ample capacity situation in keymaterial areas and also for fabricated items other thanstructural and equipment goods, incentives for inventoryaccumulation beyond short-run sales needs appear greatlydiminished.Auto sales for April have run a bit below March, and,with assemblies down further, dealer stocks have beenadditionally reduced. Used car sales have strengthened,thus holding down a further rise in used car stocks. Priceson late model used cars continue to hold about 7 per centhigher than a year ago; older model car prices have risenrecently and are now about 15 per cent above mid-spring oflast year.Output of furniture and other household durables hasbeen steady since early in the year at a level about a tenthunder early 1956. Sales in physical units are about thesame as last year and stocks, after a bulge from springthrough summer of last year in relation to sales, are nowback to about the sales relationship of early 1956.Department store sales in April were apparently offsharply from March and about the same level as April oflast year. The average for March and April was about 2per cent ahead of last year, which, at higher prices, wouldsuggest a lower physical volume of merchandise sales.Instalment credit outstandings expanded at a slowerrate in March and evidently again in April, with the monthlyincrease for these two months $50 to $75 million under the$200 million rise of January-February. While downpaymentsin auto financing are improved from a year ago, the propor-tion of longer maturity contracts written continues to risemonth after month.Although residential construction activity was downfurther, total construction in April continued close to arecord rate. Outlays for industrial, commercial, utility,and public construction were up. Contract awards so farthis year have been running above last year, with strengthnotable in areas just mentioned.In residential financing, supply conditions for con-struction and mortgage funds in most areas are reportedmodestly easier, and builders and lenders both anticipatesome further easing. Home builders' plans for the secondquarter, as reported in two Reserve districts, are indi-cated to be up sharply from the first quarter. Builders' -6-inventories of finished houses are generally at low ebband the first quarter vacancy rate for the whole countrywas reported by the Bureau of the Census to be very low--just over 2 per cent.The labor market continues active, with mainly seasonalchanges reported. More persons are working part time foreconomic reasons than last year, and unemployment claims arerunning above a year ago. This seems mainly to reflect widelydistributed employment attrition in manufacturing, togetherwith scattered layoffs, notably in the lumber and consumerdurable goods industries. About 1.4 million workers--abouta million in the railroads, machinery, and aircraft industries--will receive automatic cost-of-living wage increases in May.Discontinuance of overtime work has recently been a cost-cutting measure with many industrial concerns and the DefenseDepartment has just discontinued overtime work as an allowableitem of defense contractors. These developments are beingreflected in the work week and in weekly earnings, with de-clines in the work week about offsetting recent wage gains.Business failures have risen each month of this year, inMarch establishing a postwar high. The increase in failureshas been sharpest for companies with liabilities in excess of$100,000 and for companies in the construction industry. Whilethe number of failures in retail trade and service activitieswas up from a year ago, the number of manufacturing failuresshowed no increase, and the number of wholesale failures wasdown.Three items of business expectation information haverecently been released. The first is a marked drop inbusinessmen's optimism concerning sales and profits twoquarters ahead, reported by the quarterly Dun and Bradstreetsurvey taken in late March. The second item is the strengthof the latest McGraw-Hill survey of plant and equipmentexpenditure plans, which would indicate growth in theseexpenditures through the year rather than a rise in thefirst half with some decline following. The third expecta-tions item pertains to farm income. The USDA expects netrealized income of farmers to rise modestly further in 1957,mainly because of Soil Bank Payments; the rise from 1955 to1956 was an estimated 4 per cent.Abroad, in Western Europe, there are further indicationsof renewed economic expansion and some further up-drift inwholesale and consumer prices. Inflationary demand pressuresin Western Europe are a matter of wide concern, and policiesto restrain excess demands have been re-enforced in severalcountries, with several more having actions under consideration. 5/7/57 -7-Canadian economic trends have broadly paralleled those inthis country. Outside Europe and North America, infla-tionary pressures remain dominant, but with considerablevariation from one country to another in intensity andincidence.In conclusion, the over-all situation continues to beone of rolling adjustment but of general strength, withactive demands from abroad giving support to domestic de-velopments. Total national product prospects for thesecond quarter are for a further gain of $3 billion to atotal annual rate of $430 billion, again partly reflectingrising prices, though to a lesser extent than in the firstquarter. This outlook would envision relatively stableindustrial and construction output and further rise inoutput of services.In response to a question from Mr. Vardaman, Mr. Young saidthat the reported vacancy factor of about 2 per cent in housing dur-ing the first quarter of the year was low historically. In Mr. Young'sopinion the 2 per cent figure represented a fairly small vacancy marginand suggested a rather strong over-all residential building picture.Mr. Thomas then made a statement on recent credit developmentssubstantially as follows:Credit markets have continued under the pressure oflarge borrowing demands during recent weeks. New securi-ties issued by corporations, though at a slower rate thanin the first quarter, have continued relatively heavy Anunusually large volume of issues by state and local govern-ments in April created some congestion in the market. Totalloans and investments of banks, which increased sharply as aresult of the Treasury cash financing at the end of March,have subsequently continued on a high plateau.A particularly significant development in the periodhas been the fact that as the Treasury has drawn down itsbalances built up during March, the funds have gone to swellprivate deposits rather than to reduce bank credit. Totalloans increased about half a billion in the four weeks endingMay 1, a little less than last year and about the sam as in1955, but investments decreased less than in the earlieryears. U. S. Government deposits were reduced by 1-1/4 bil-lion, and demand deposits adjusted increased by the same 5/7/57 -8-amount. The decline in Treasury deposits and the increasein other deposits were both greater than in 1956 and 1955--periods when expansionary pressures were strong. The moneysupply showed a greater than seasonal increase during April.Pressures of credit demands resulted in a sharp runupin bond yields. Yields on all categories of bonds increased.Seasoned corporate issues, which were relatively stable forabout two months, showed the smallest rise, but yields onnew offerings showed a more pronounced increase. Yields ontax-exempt securities have risen most sharply. Treasurybond yields also turned up in April, after a period ofrelative stability in March. Long-term issues rose closeto the 3-1/2 per cent peak reached in December. The shorterterm issues still sell at higher yields than long-term bonds,but the margin has narrowed considerably since December.It appears that money and capital markets are still inthe process of reaching a level and structure of interestrates appropriate for a period of full utilization of re-sources with large investment demands. We cannot be confi-dent that long-term rates are yet high enough to bring in-vestment and savings into balance in such a situation.In contrast, yields on Treasury bills, which rose some-what early in April, have again declined to below 3 per cent.The difference between the movement of yields on bonds andthose on bills reflects to some extent prevailing uncertaintywith respect to the prospective trend of long-term interestrates--or rather a growing feeling that such rates mightrise further. One aspect of this uncertainty relates to theimminent announcement of terms on new Treasury financing.Another factor producing lower bill rates was the marked easingin the reserve position of member banks, but the tone of themoney market continued to be one of greater tightness thanwould be indicated either by the reserve situation or by billrates.The easier reserve position was reflected in a reductionof member bank borrowing from around $1 billion in the firsthalf of April to an average of $700 million in the lateststatement week. This was in part accidental and has alreadybeen partly corrected. The principal influence was thehigher level of float resulting from the Railway Expressstrike at airports, which added some $300 million additionalreserves beyond the usual seasonal trend. Other factorswere the deliberate, though temporary, reduction in Treasurybalances at the Reserve Banks and a more than seasonal de-cline of currency in circulation. These sources of reserves more than covered the greater than expected increase in re-quired reserves, resulting from the expansion in privatedeposits. A reduction in System holdings of securities heldunder repurchase contract and recently a run-off of Treasurybill maturities, also absorbed some of the reserves madeavailable.Reserve needs in the weeks ahead will depend in part uponhow fast float returns to a more normal level and more funda-mentally upon the course of bank credit made available to meetdemands for money. The money supply should not be expected tocontinue to increase at the April rate, and might reasonablycontract some on a seasonally adjusted basis. Projectionsbased on the assumptions of a gradual return of float to amore normal level by early June and a normal seasonal movementin private deposits and currency, indicate a relatively easysituation until the end of June, with average net borrowedreserves ranging from less than $100 in mid-May to over $500million in Memorial Day week. These estimates allow forretirement of System repurchase contracts outstanding, butfor no other System account operations.In view of the recent expansion in money, it is question-able whether this prospect will be adequately restrictive.Probably some outright sales by the System would be appropriatein the latter part of next week. Repurchase contracts couldthen be used to meet the regular and temporary increases inreserve needs. Any growth in reserve needs beyond these pro-jections would indicate an expansionary development, and banksshould be forced to meet them through borrowing at the ReserveBanks, in order to keep an element of restraint on continuedcredit expansion.Solicitude for the Government securities market shouldnot interfere with a policy of this nature. If attrition islarge on the refunding operations now in process, additionalfunds will be supplied to the market by the Treasury. Amountsmade available for private credit needs should be correspond-ingly reduced. I do not intend to suggest that an aggressivelyrestrictive policy will be in order. The degree of restraintneeded will depend upon the course of credit demands. Thetrend of events so far, however, does not provide any basisfor relaxation.Chairman Martin noted that Mr. Treiber was attending the meetingin Mr. Hayes' place and asked that he comment on the economic situationand credit policy. Mr. Treiber made a statement as follows: -10-The business situation continues strong, but not expand-ing. Business sentiment, however, is more optimistic. Whileindicators of current business remain strong, a number of thosewhich anticipate future trends continue to exhibit weakness.Employment remains high. Over-all consumer buying con-tinues high. Retail sales continue on a plateau. Total busi-ness inventories are no longer being accumulated.Auto production schedules have been adjusted to avoid apiling up of inventories. Steel production has been easingoff, reflecting a decline in demand extending beyond the autoindustry. The steel industry, however, is not concerned aboutthe outlook. Construction outlays continue at a high rate;declines in residential building are being offset by a risingvolume of public construction and private nonresidential con-struction.Over all, wholesale prices are leveling off. The consumerprice index, however, continues to rise. While an increase infarm prices is not anticipated, other retail prices are likelyto continue to rise. The rise seems to be a delayed reactionto the cost increases of last year rather than a reflection ofincreasing consumer demand.Plant and equipment expenditures continue at record levels.As costs rise and market competition intensifies, profitmargins will be subject to pressure that may lead to a re-appraisal of investment plans. Reports of corporate earningsfor the first quarter of 1957, however, do not indicate anygeneral intensification of the pressure, nor does the mostrecent McGraw Hill survey for the next three years suggestsuch a reappraisal.Business opinion is becoming more optimistic in the lightof the current strength and the ability of the economy to con-tinue to operate close to record levels without support frommajor new expansionary forces.The demand for bank credit continues strong, but appar-ently at lesser intensity than last year. The liquidation ofinvestments this year has been small compared to the heavyliquidation occurring in the corresponding period of 1956.Federal Government expenditures are increasing, thusreducing the Treasury cash surplus for the fiscal year.Attrition on the current refinancing is expected to belarger than usual. The Treasury will have to borrow forcash by July; it may need to do so in June, or in late May.The policy of monetary and credit restraint should becontinued in order to resist remaining price pressures. Weshould not make an overt move toward either more or less5/7/57 restraint through open market operations or through achange in the discount rate. In the present setting andin the midst of a Treasury refunding operation it isdesirable for the System to maintain a steady degree ofrestraint at about the levels of pressure sought in thelast two weeks.In the period between now and the next meeting ofthe Committee it would not seem necessary to make any sub-stantial amount of outright purchases or sales. MaturingTreasury bills should be run off, but it should not benecessary otherwise to offset the midmonth float expansionwhich will last only a few days. A continuation of re-purchase agreements to assist the dealers to carry the1-5/8 per cent Treasury notes maturing May 15 is in order.Such action promises to assist the Treasury refunding andwould not be inconsistent with the overriding objective ofcredit restraint.While too much emphasis should not be placed onstatistics, we would think in terms of net borrowed re-serves in the neighborhood of a half billion dollars andmember bank borrowings of about $1 billion.At this point, Mr. Treiber referred to Item 4c on the agenda re-lating to the responsibilities of the Treasury and the Federal Open Mar-ket Committee in the area of open market operations. He stated that hewas also prepared to comment on this subject, and Chairman Martin sug-gested that he do so at this time. Mr. Treiber's statement was asfollows:The current Treasury refunding operations have raisedagain the question of the Committee's responsibilities inconnection with Treasury financing.The policies of the Federal Government with respect toincome and spending are determined by the Congress. TheCommittee is bound by those policies. While Federal Reservepolicy may at times seek to discourage or postpone privateborrowing and the anticipated expenditures in connection withthe borrowing, such a purpose is inapplicable to Governmentborrowing. The Government must be financed.There is, of course, some latitude in the details ofGovernment financing, and the Treasury has the primaryresponsibility for determining those details. The5/7/57-11- 5/7/57 -12-Government securities market, however, is the principalmedium for the adjustment of the reserves of banks andothers. We create and extinguish reserves through opera-tions in that market. We administer credit policy byoperating, or by refraining from operating, in that market.It seems to me that we cannot administer credit policywithout regard to the Government securities market and tothe financing requirements of the Treasury.It has frequently been said that the Federal Reservehas primary responsibility for credit policy and the Treas-ury has primary responsibility for debt management. Theremust be a maximum of coordination between the System andthe Treasury consistent with the primary responsibilitiesof each. Each must avoid as much as possible interferingwith the other in the performance of its duties.In pursuance of these principles, the Treasury shouldprice its securities in line with market rates. When itdoes so--when it submits itself to the discipline of themarket--the System has a responsibility to avoid actionthat may jeopardize the financing. We should then, as wehave consistently since the accord, recognize that theinitial impact of an operation as large as a Treasuryfinancing may create temporary digestive disturbanceswith which we need be concerned.Within the last couple of weeks our attention hasfocused on the administration of Treasury balances. Theiradministration affects the amount of bank reserves, andit is by influencing the amount of bank reserves that theFederal Reserve carries out credit policy. The Treasuryhas the responsibility for administering its balances soas to be able to pay its obligations; such administrationmust be part of its program for handling receipts and dis-bursements. Within that program there may be fluctuationsin the Treasury's balances at the Reserve Banks. The Treas-ury and the Federal Reserve try to project those fluctuationsand conduct their respective functions in the light of theprojections. When, however, the Treasury manages its ac-counts for the specific purpose of increasing, or other-wise influencing, bank reserves, it is engaging directly inan act of credit management for which the Federal Reservehas primary responsibility. That we do not want.To avoid the Committee and the Treasury working atcross purposes and undertaking important steps in theprimary sphere of responsibility of the other party, theremust be a willingness to consider carefully and sympatheticallythe problems of the other party. -13-Last month, Norman Davis of the Federal Reserve Bankof New York and I returned to the United States after a ten-week trip around the world, during which we visited thecentral banks in a number of countries in the southernhemisphere. In most of the countries the governor and thedirectors of the central bank are appointed by or upon therecommendation of the Minister of Finance, and the degreeof responsibility (or subservience) of the central bank tothe Minister varies. In most of the countries the govern-ment has a special pipeline to the central bank. The govern-ment can borrow directly from the central bank, in some casesmerely by drawing checks and creating an overdraft. Theabsence of a well-developed government securities market is,of course, an important factor leading to arrangements fordirect loans by the central bank to the government. But thedesire to escape the discipline of a market is also an im-portant factor. In none of the countries is the Treasurysubjected to market discipline the way it is in the UnitedStates where direct accommodation of the Treasury by theReserve Banks is in practice granted only infrequently insmall amounts for very short periods and for the limitedpurpose of smoothing out the impact of large money move-ments at tax payment dates.The central banking system in the United States is,indeed, fortunate. Not only does the Federal Reserve Systemenjoy a structural independence within the government, butalso present Treasury officials are personally sympatheticto Federal Reserve problems and objectives. This greatprivilege that we enjoy creates a corresponding duty on ourpart to consider carefully and sympathetically the problemsand views of the Treasury. If we are arbitrary and aloof--ifwe do not give adequate consideration to the Treasury's prob-lems--a justifiable reaction may undermine our independence;indeed, the results could be drastic.It now appears that there will shortly be a new firstteam at the Treasury. It may not be much longer before theSenate Finance Committee will begin a new study which willinclude the inter-relations between Treasury debt managementand System monetary and credit policies. In these circumstances,would it not be well for us to consider and prepare for pos-sible discussions with the Treasury--both at the staff andthe policy level? Would it not be to the interest of bothagencies to review together the aims and impact of the actionswhich each should be expected to take, in discharging itsrespective responsibilities? Chairman Martin said that he wished to propose that the Com-mittee have a staff study made of the problem to which Mr. Treiberhad just referred and that it plan to discuss the problem at itsnext meeting. It would be desirable to furnish the members of theCommittee with data regarding the operations of the Treasurer's ac-count preparatory to a full discussion of the matter, he said, addingthat it would be appropriate to have preliminary comments this morning.Mr. Johns said that he was in agreement with the recommenda-tions concerning credit policy made by Mr. Treiber, as he understoodthem. His view concerning the present state of the economy was quitein agreement with the staff review presented this morning. Perhapsthe degree of restraint should be somewhat although not drasticallygreater than in the recent past, Mr. Johns said. He concurred withMr. Treiber's comment that it might not be necessary to attempt tooffset the mid-month bulge in float to be expected within the nextcouple of weeks.As a member of the Committee of three appointed to conduct astudy of Federal Reserve float, Mr. Johns said that he had had theprivilege of reading the report by the staff group on the subject.He had discovered that, if the staff group was correct, most of whathe previously thought he knew about float was not correct. Histentative conclusion was that the Committee should not attempt throughopen market operations to offset relatively short-run fluctuations in5/7/57-14 - 5/7/57 -15-float. This view had some implications regarding the usefulness ofnet borrowed reserve figures as indicators of Committee policy, Mr.Johns said, and he would hesitate to name any net borrowed reservefigure at which the Committee might aim. He agreed that the degreeof pressure should be somewhat greater. Mr. Johns said that he wouldmake no change in the discount rate at this time.Mr. Bryan stated that the Sixth District situation seemed tobe mixed. There had been a slight increase in nonfarm unemployment.However, contract awards had taken another spurt. In general, thereseemed to be no distinct trend in economic activity in the AtlantaDistrict. The banking situation seemed to be a little better, andborrowing at the Federal Reserve had gone down sharply. Mr. Bryan'simpression of the national picture was much as Mr. Young had outlinedit; if there was an upward tilt to the economy at the moment it was avery modest tilt. He did not believe, particularly in view of longerrun considerations, that any easing of credit restraint at the presenttime would be justifiable. Accordingly, Mr. Bryan agreed with thestatements so far made that the System should not take the dramaticstep of reducing the discount rate. His feeling was that open marketoperations should be continued with a view to keeping the bill ratefrom moving too far below the discount rate. This was because he feltthere would be unfortunate implications for the long run, if pro-gressively lower yields developed in that area. Mr. Bryan said thathe would be inclined, if there seemed to be a continued lowering of 5/7/57 -16-yields in the bill market, to effect sales from the System account.He was increasingly concerned about the long-run problem of equi-librium in the interest rate which he had mentioned in the past.He referred to a recent book by Peter Drucker, America's Next TwentyYears, which he felt pointed up the problem. The net of his feelingwas that he would not like to see easing at the present time thatwould complicate the Committee's longer-run problem of getting equi-librium in this area.Mr. Williams said that the Philadelphia Bank had recheckedcapital expenditure plans and conferred with some twenty economistsof business concerns since the preceding meeting of the Committee.One of the strong factors brought out was the high level of capitalexpenditures expected. Many plants were revising their plans upward,and current plans for expenditures during 1957 are about 6 per centhigher than were anticipated in the fall of 1956. If these plansare realized, Mr. Williams said that expenditures during the currentyear would be about 20 per cent above the 1956 total.The staff of the Philadelphia Bank found in its meeting withindustrial economists a general attitude of "tempered optimism," Mr.Williams said. Prospects were reported good for the next severalmonths, with new orders running about the same as last year. Therewere some soft spots, for example, freight carloadings continued belowlast year, perhaps reflecting the growth of commercial and privatetrucking, Mr. Williams said. Manufacturing employment continued 5/7/57 -17-steady. Department store sales for 1957 to date were up 2 per centfrom last year, and in some recent weeks the increase had been asmuch as 10 per cent. Automobile registrations continued well belowlast year.Loans of reporting member banks declined in the most recentweeks, Mr. Williams said, mainly because of decreases in real estateand business loans, whereas last year there was an increase in totalloans. Borrowings at the Federal Reserve declined, althoughPhiladelphia banks continued to be net purchasers of Federal fundsin three of the four weeks of April. Mr. Williams said that theconclusions to be drawn from the review by the Philadelphia Bankwere about the same as from the economic review presented by thestaff at this meeting. On the basis of current developments, hefelt that a continuation of substantially the existing degree ofrestraint would be appropriate.Mr. Fulton said that Fourth District industrial activity con-tinued strong despite some downward movements in activities associatedwith the automotive industry. Employment was holding up well. Retailsales were being well maintained and anticipated capital expenditurescontinued high. Loan demand was strong. There was no indication ofinventory accumulations and, as a matter of fact, there was a likeli-hood that inventories were being liquidated because of the greateravailability of goods. New orders for machine tools were about equal 5/7/57 -18-to production. The backlog of orders was no longer increasing asit had been over the past two years, but there was still a goodworking backlog. The steel industry reported some softening indemand for sheet, strip, and continuous welded pipe, as well asfor certain types of plate. Companies using steel strip were re-ducing inventories quite rapidly. It was expected that automobilemanufacturers, who were now consuming more steel than they wereordering, would be in the market for steel by the third quarter ofthe year. The road building program had a good potential but hadbeen very slow in getting started. Mr. Fulton noted that the con-tracts between automobile manufacturers and unions expired in June1958 and this might be a factor causing manufacturers to operateat high rates of production during the last quarter of this yearin order to build up inventories of dealers in anticipation of apossible prolonged strike in 1958Mr. Fulton said that there seemed to be no reason for anyrelaxation of the Committee's policy of restraint. Funds were beingutilized at a high rate and, if additional funds were supplied, theinflationary potential would become more active. Mr. Fulton feltthat perhaps there should be some tightening. He would not changethe discount rate at this time but he agreed with Mr. Bryan that ifthe bill rate as an index of the use of funds declined too far belowthe discount rate, the Committee should bring it more into consonancewith the discount rate. 5/7/57 -19-Mr. Shepardson said that he was generally in agreementwith the comments made thus far. The economic outlook was stillon the optimistic side even though conditions varied in differentindustries. The point mentioned by Mr. Bryan as to the long-runpicture and the prospective need for capital funds in the futuremade Mr. Shepardson feel that this was no time for easing. Rather,he would favor a little increase in pressure. This need not be theresult of overt action, but the Committee should keep the market"snugged up." Mr. Shepardson noted that Mr. Bryan had said he wouldnot recommend a reduction in the discount rate. Mr. Shepardson'sfeeling was that, if anything, the System should expect to be con-sidering a little later on whether the rate should be increased.He certainly would not favor a reduction now. As to the bill rate,Mr. Shepardson felt it would be desirable if it were brought backcloser to the level at which it had been in the recent past.Mr. Robertson said that he had prepared a memorandum of hisviews and that they followed closely what had been said at the meet-ing this morning. He agreed that this was no time for easing thesituation. The Committee should maintain restraint, and he hoped itwould do so during the next three weeks in accordance with the toneof the discussions at the preceding two meetings of the Committee.Mr. Robertson went on to say that it seemed to him that Mr.Treiber's points with respect to the relationship between the Com-mittee and the Treasury were well taken, and he agreed as far as the 5/7/57 -20-comments went. He felt that the attempt of the Treasury to inter-fere with open market policy was unjustified. This should be amatter of real concern to the Committee and he hoped the Committee'sfeelings would be presented to the Treasury. This should not bedone on an "off-the-cuff" basis but only after staff study and fulldiscussion of the matter. There should be a definite understandingbetween the Committee and the Treasury of the fields of operationsof each. The Committee should not be unsympathetic to the Treasury'sproblem; on the contrary, it should be very sympathetic. However,the Treasury also should be sympathetic to the Federal Reserve'sproblem. In summary, Mr. Robertson said that he would hope the Com-mittee would find a means of bringing about a better understandingbetween the Treasury and the Committee with respect to the functionsand responsibilities of each.At Chairman Martin's suggestion, it was understood that thememorandum that Mr. Robertson had prepared in anticipation of themeeting would be placed in the minutes. The memorandum was as follows:Since the last regular meeting of the Federal OpenMarket Committee, net borrowed reserves of member bankshave declined sharply, suddenly, and unexpectedly froma weekly average level of over $600 million in the firsthalf of April to an average of around $300 million. Inthe meantime, the Treasury bond market has been generallyweak with yields tending to rise, while the bill markethas been strong with declining yields.1. On the basis of the discussion at the last regularmeeting of the Committee and the minutes of the specialtelephone conference meeting held in the interim, the aimsof System operations in this period were, in view of the -21-prospective Treasury financing, to prevent the developmentof undue tightness that might arise from the high level ofborrowings previously prevailing, but not to create a con-dition of ease that would indicate any reversal of restrainton credit expansion.2. The unexpectedly sharp decline in member bank borrow-ing was due primarily to a substantial increase in Federal Re-serve float during the Railway Express strike. This accountedfor the supplying of some $300 million additional reserves inthis period. Another temporary factor supplying reserves wasthe deliberate reduction by the Treasury in its balance atReserve Banks which, accidentally, was ill-timed because ofthe concurrent increase in float. There was also during theseweeks a more than seasonal decline of currency in circulationthat added a moderate amount to the supply of reserves. Anoffsetting factor was a contraseasonal increase in requiredreserves and some moderate sales of securities from Systemaccount.3. The somewhat anomalous developments in the money mar-ket were the result of various crosscurrents. On one hand,there was a continued strong credit demand both at banks andin the capital market and the outlook for continued largecapital market borrowing, as well as a more bullish attitudetoward the general economic outlook. These forces tended toreduce bond prices. At the same time, uncertainties as tothe terms of the prospective Treasury financing and the out-look for long-term interest rates led investors to place fundsin Treasury bills, thus tending to reduce the bill rate.4. One of the most significant developments in thisperiod was the more than seasonal expansion in private deposits,which is indicated by the rise in required reserves. This ex-pansion in private deposits resulted largely from a reductionin Treasury deposits which had been built up during March bytax receipts and by Treasury cash financing. Funds expendedby the Treasury apparently went into the building up of cashbalances rather than into the liquidation of bank credit.They are thus available for further use and represent anexpansionary influence.5. In essence, the current situation is one in whichborrowing by the Treasury and by Government agencies is con-tributing to credit and monetary expansion that has gonebeyond the aims of Federal Reserve policy. Under these cir-cumstances, the Treasury should be obliged to compete withother borrowers for available funds and the System shouldavoid as much as possible making things easier for theTreasury with the result of creating a situation inconsistent 5/7/57 -22-with the System's broad objectives. Whether or not theterms of the current Treasury refunding offerings arerealistic will depend upon the future course of expan-sion in the volume and use of the private money supply.The situation prevailing today is not one that callsfor relaxation in the System's policy of restraint onexpansion and I would recommend that we "hold the line"until the next meeting--in accordance with the expressionof opinion contained in the minutes of the last two meetings.However, it seems to me that the Treasury's operationsduring the period, in one respect at least, represented anobvious and unjustifiable attempt to interfere with FederalReserve credit policy. This should be a matter of real con-cern to the Open Market Committee. Our concern should beclearly expressed to Treasury officials.Mr. Mills said that to some extent at the last meeting of theCommittee and even more so at today's meeting he had been struck bythe tone of the discussion which, in his opinion, tended to confusewhat was theoretically desirable in the field of economics with whatwas practically attainable in the area of markets. He referred to astatement by Mr. Thomas this morning to the effect that the long-termrate of interest had not yet risen to the point that would bringabout a balance between the supply of available savings and the usesto which those savings could be practically put. The implicationthat would derive from that statement, Mr. Mills suggested, was thatthe objective of System policy would be to seek a long-term rate ofinterest that would realize the desirable equilibrium. In so doing,he said, the System's fundamental responsibility to the economy formaintaining a proper degree of credit availability would of necessitybe discarded. Furthermore, marching along that path would raise thecomplications to the Treasury that were voiced very ably by Mr.Treiber. 5/7/57 -23-To put the case in a little different way, Mr. Mills saidthat in his opinion the present market for U. S. Government securi-ties registered the availability of credit in a very real way be-cause it was having to absorb the securities that the pressure ofSystem policy properly compelled the banks to sell in order to carefor the legitimate demands for credit that were made upon them at atime that its absorptive capacity had already been reduced by theprevious effects of the heavy demand for bank credit. Therefore,as viewed by Mr. Mills, price movements in a U. S. Government securi-ties market that System policy had made extremely sensitive registeredthe availability of bank credit in line with the volume of necessitousbank sales of U. S. Government securities. Considering the System'sresponsibility for maintaining a reasonable degree of credit availa-bility and also considering the desirability of avoiding actionsthat would throw roadblocks in front of the Treasury's financingprogram, Mr. Mills expressed his belief that a System credit policybelligerently seeking a higher interest rate structure would forcethe prices of U. S. Government securities down rapidly and theiryields up in a manner contrary to the best interests of all concerned.Accordingly, it was his thought that the Manager of the Open MarketAccount should have latitude for gauging the feel of the market andfor supplying or withdrawing reserves to the end that a degree ofpressure would be exerted sufficient to prevent any overexpansionof credit while at the same time the Treasury's reasonable needs 5/7/57 -24-could be accommodated. Such a policy should presumably producean interest rate structure consistent with the System's generalpolicy objectives.Mr. Vardaman said that on the basis of statistics it mightappear that more pressure should be applied. However, his impressionbased on conversations with many persons during the past six weekssuggested the contrary. He had gotten the impression that the "bloomwas off the rose." Psychologically, the economy seemed to be in avery touchy period, he said, and he did not think the boom wouldcontinue. Stress could easily develop quickly if there were unduetightness in money markets. Mr. Vardaman said that his view wouldbe to maintain about the same course that had been maintainedrecently. He certainly would not tighten the situation at all.Neither would he loosen it, nor would he reduce the discount rate,because the psychological effect of any dramatic action might beunfavorable. He would emphasize through System educational publica-tions that the economy was sound, that the System expected it todevelop satisfactorily, and that the Federal Reserve would supplythe reserves necessary to maintain the economy. Mr. Vardaman re-iterated the statement that he would not tighten the situation atall and would not commit any overt act to change the present levelof pressure, but he would be prepared to supply whatever reserveswere needed. He would let the public know that the System wasprepared to do this. 5/7/57 -25-As to Treasury relations and the study proposed by theChairman, Mr. Vardaman raised the question whether relations be-tween the two institutions were such that a unilateral study shouldbe carried out. It would be preferable, he suggested, to have ajoint study made by the Federal Reserve and the Treasury. He thoughtthis especially desirable in view of the fact that a Committee ofCongress would be studying monetary and credit policy in the courseof the next few months.Mr. Leach said that the Fifth District economy continued inbalance. Evidence of further weakening in manufacturing was offsetby signs of strength in other sectors. Employment in virtually allnonmanufacturing categories had shown recent increases as well asgains from a year ago. High construction contract awards in Marchbrought the first quarter to a total nearly two-fifths above 1956.Cotton textile operations continued a downward adjustment with moremills cutting back to a five-day work week. Prices were holdingsteady, and once again it was felt that an improvement should notbe far off. Bituminous coal production was down somewhat from thehigh level of March, but the underlying strength of demand was un-changed. Automobile dealers within the district reported dis-appointing new car sales in April. Used car sales were said tohave shown a satisfactory gain from March. A spot check of a fewreal estate lenders indicated that mortgage money was becoming moreavailable with some effect on conventional loan interest rates andon prices of FHA loans. 5/7/57 -26-Mr. Leach said that in his judgment over-all economicactivity was continuing on a plateau at very high levels. Hesaw no evidence of the development of a cumulative downwardspiral in activity. In the hope that a healthy readjustment atpresent high levels might be brought about, he would continue thedegree of restraint that had existed during the current statementweek. Having that view of the immediate economic outlook, hethought that the Committee might expect net borrowed reservesaround the $500 million level to be appropriate. Mr. Leach madeit clear that this figure was merely an indication of his thinkingat the moment, and he was not setting it as a fixed goal.Mr. Leach went on to say that it was difficult for him tounderstand the statements that had been made to the effect thatthe Committee should take no overt action during the next few weeks.He felt that if net borrowed reserves declined to $38 million in theweek of May 22, as indicated by the staff projections prepared atthe Board, the Committee might need to take some action in order tomaintain the existing degree of restraint.Mr. Vardaman commented that his statement that he would nottake overt action to change the present level of pressure did notmean he thought there should be no purchases or sales for the Systemaccount. He meant that nothing should be done that would be in-consistent with present policy.Mr. Treiber said that his remarks contemplated that theremight be some small operations for the System account but that it 5/7/57 -27-was not expected that there would be substantial operations.Mr. Leedy said that Tenth District agricultural conditionscontinued to improve. Recent rains were in sharp contrast to theconditions that had existed for several years, and growing condi-tions for the wheat crop at this time were favorable with expecta-tions of a good winter wheat crop. These conditions, plus thesizable amount of soil bank payments being made, should place agri-culture in a favorable position during the current year. Mr. Leedywent on to say that he had been surprised at the strength shown bystatistics thus far this year for most parts of the district in theface of the widespread drought that had been experienced. Retailsales were at the same level as a year ago. Employment was stableand, although there was variation from area to area, the over-allsituation seemed strong. There had been no evidence of pressure onbank reserves in recent weeks. This situation probably had beeninfluenced by large payments made at the end of March by the CommodityCredit Corporation on wheat loans, and there also had been a sizableincrease in bank deposits flowing into the district, particularly inthe oil area in Oklahoma.As to System policy, Mr. Leedy would continue to exerciserestraint. Statistically, perhaps there should be greater restraintthan had existed on the average since the preceding meeting of theCommittee. 5/7/57 -28-With reference to relations with the Treasury, Mr. Leedysaid that he did not differ with the suggestion for a study of theability of the Treasury to counteract policy of the Committee. Hefelt that the recent Treasury action of reducing its balances forthe purpose of putting funds into the market was an act that wasintended to circumvent the program being followed by the Committee.Mr. Leedy said that while he would not attempt to summarily resolvethe issue with the Treasury, he wished to make the point that fromthe very nature of the operation the Treasury should have discussedthe action it had in mind with the Chairman of the Committee beforeundertaking to carry it into effect. Mr. Leedy felt, accordingly,that it would be appropriate for the Treasury to be promptly in-formed to that effect and at the same time advised that the Com-mittee expected to go further into the matter and to discuss itwith the Treasury at a later date.Mr. Allen said that business activity in the Seventh Districtcontinued at a high level. Total construction was about the same asa year ago despite the fact that Midwest awards for both residentialand nonresidential construction had been weaker than in the nation.The job market in the Seventh District had continued to ease somewhat.In March and April, a number of Midwest centers failed to experienceemployment gains that had been anticipated by the local analysts. Inno case, however, was there any significant deterioration expected inthe months to come, and many centers expected some improvement. 5/7/57 -29-The major development in Seventh District business loansduring recent weeks had been a slowing in the rate of increase inloans to metal and metal product firms. From the start of the yearthrough March 20 and the final spurt in corporate borrowing to meettax payments, the rise in outstandings of metals companies atdistrict reporting banks matched the gain recorded a year earlier.In the seven succeeding weeks from March 20 through May 1, however,such loans registered a $1 million decline compared with a $49 mil-lion rise last year. Time deposits at Seventh District member banksmade further gains during March, bringing balances to a level 6-1/2per cent above a year ago. Recent gains had been at an increasingrate. In general, cities where banks had boosted interest ratespaid on savings deposits showed the largest gains in balances. Theincrease in savings deposits reflected both a rise in savings in-flow and a decline in withdrawals.With respect to credit restraint, Mr. Allen said that hebelieved the program should be continued with roughly the samedegree of restraint as we have had. He considered that feel of themarket was more important than any figure to be used as a guide, buthe would consider that net borrowed reserves around $500 millionmight be indicative. If that degree of restraint were to be maintained,the Committee would either have to sell securities or permit presentholdings of bills to mature without replacement, on the basis of theprojections of reserves. 5/7/57 -30-Mr. Allen then referred to the comments he had made at thetelephone conference meeting on April 24 regarding the Treasury'saction in reducing its balances in order to put more reserves intothe market. The Treasury does a good many things that offer diffi-culty for the Committee, Mr. Allen said. The reduction in balanceswas a minor action compared with many other things that cause diffi-culty for the Committee. While it would be appropriate to discussthis matter with the Treasury, he felt that the Committee should notcomplain about everything the Treasury did that caused the Committeedifficulty.Mr. Deming said that in the Ninth District employment was upfrom a year ago in both manufacturing and nonmanufacturing activities.Farm prospects were better than they had been for the last severalyears. Credit demand continued extremely strong. At city banks,this was in the face of a seasonal loss in deposits. These influenceshad resulted in a sharp increase in borrowings from the Federal ReserveBank in recent weeks.Nationally, Mr. Deming said that he was impressed more withthe factors of strength in the economy than with the factors ofweakness. This argued for a continuation of a policy of restraint.He would not disagree with the estimate of around $500 million ofnet borrowed reserves. He shared with Mr. Bryan the feeling thatthe bill rate might be higher than the discount rate, and he hopedthat a continuation of pressure would be reflected in a somewhat 5/7/57 -31-higher bill rate than at present. Mr. Deming said that he alsofelt that during the week of May 22 when projected net borrowedreserves would be low, it would be desirable to take some actionto keep the level of net borrowed reserves in rough line with the$500 million average level suggested.Mr. Mangels said that there seemed to be some evidence ofa change in pace of activity in the Twelfth District. In past yearsthe increase in nonagricultural employment during the first quarterof the year had been somewhat above the increase nationally, and in1956 each quarter had showed a rise over the preceding quarter.During the first quarter of 1957, the figures of employment showedpractically the same level as during the last quarter of 1956. Fortwo months in succession now, nonagricultural employment had showna slight decline with most of the decline coming in manufacturing,mining, and construction. Total manhours worked in manufacturingindustries declined from January through March, Mr. Mangels said,although the total at the end of the quarter was 6 per cent higherthan a year earlier. There had been a slight increase in buildingand March was above February, although residential permits werestill down. Public construction was expected to show some increaseduring the next few months and there had been indications of an in-crease in heavy construction. Steel production, contrary to thenational picture, was about 100 per cent of capacity and there were 5/7/57 -32-plans for expansion of steel facilities on the .est Coast. Lumberproduction was still below 1956, but Mr. Mangels said he sensed alittle more optimistic feeling on the part of lumber people than afew weeks ago. Some of the plywood mills had gone to a five-dayweek and there were indications of some strengthening in prices.Retail sales in the Twelfth District were up 6 per centduring the Easter period. Automobile registrations in Californiain the first three months of this year were 6 per cent above thefirst quarter of last year, although in other States declines werereported. A decrease in the volume of work at automobile serviceestablishments was also indicated.Twelfth District reporting member banks showed an increase inloans during the four weeks ending April 24, Mr. Mangels said. Banksexpect that loan totals will be held below the figures of a year ago.There continued to be a runoff in mortgage loans and an increase insavings accounts, Mr. Mangels said, and those funds are not beingfully reinvested in mortgages.As to policy, Mr. Mangels said that he had in mind a figureof about $500 million for net borrowed reserves as a maximum. Hewould not be concerned if they fluctuated between $400-500 million.Neither would he be concerned if some variations in float createdsome temporary easing. Mr. Mangels thought the present directivewas satisfactory, and he would propose no change in the discount rateat this time. -33-Mr. Mangels said that he agreed that the Committee mustconsider not only the needs of commerce and industry and the generalcredit condition of the country, but it should also give sympatheticconsideration to Treasury needs.Mr. Irons said that the national situation seemed to be oneof improving strength with still some uncertainty in the picture.This was about the picture in the Eleventh District also. Employmentwas up in manufacturing. Construction activity was also up. Therewas considerable plant expansion in the Dallas, Fort Worth, Houston,and Gulf Coast areas. Agricultural conditions were better than forsome time. Automobile sales in Dallas and Houston were runningcounter to most reports and showed an increase of 11 per cent duringthe first four months of this year as compared with the same perioda year ago. In April they were well above April a year ago.Mr. Irons said that he considered impressions of businessmento be important, and he observed them now as reflecting a cautiousoptimism. He knew of no pessimism. More and more businessmen werebecoming fearful of the steady inflationary rise in business costs.They feared that they might not be able to continue to pass on therise in costs in higher prices. Businessmen more or less acceptedthe necessity of a restrictive credit policy, Mr. Irons said, andthey were trying to decide what that meant to their own businesses.Mr. Irons said that he would continue a policy of firm creditrestraint with any deviation from the normal being on the side of 5/7/57 -34-greater restraint rather than on the side of ease. As to netborrowed reserves, he thought the Account Management should beguided by the behavior and feel of the market. That might bethe guide whether net borrowed reserves were $800 million or $300million. He did not think the average of net borrowed reserves wastoo significant, feeling that it was a resultant of forces that ofthemselves might not be too significant. The Account Managementmust take the responsibility of appraising the feel and the toneof the market.With respect to the Treasury problem that arose in the lastthree weeks, Mr. Irons said that while this was an important issue,he doubted the wisdom of making it a major issue. As Mr. Allen hadindicated, handling of the Treasury balance was within the provinceof the Treasury. It was not within their province to handle creditpolicy. With the two institutions each having important and basicresponsibilities, he believed it desirable to try to bring aboutunderstanding by contact between the Chairman of the Committee andthe Secretary of the Treasury. He doubted that a statistical studyof the Treasury balance or that making a major issue out of move-ments in that balance would provide the answer to the problem.Mr. Erickson said that conditions in the New England Districtwere not materially different from the national picture outlined. Hefound the same feeling of cautious optimism that Mr. Irons had re-ported, along with concern about future inflation. Mr. Erickson said 5/7/57 -35-that ordinary life insurance sales in the First District in Marchwere substantially ahead of March 1956. Construction in allclassifications also was ahead of March last year except in the caseof public works, in which the total a year ago had been especiallyhigh. Residential building in the first quarter of this year wasalso only 4 per cent below last year. For the first time in somemonths there had been evidence of optimism in the textile industry,Mr. Erickson said, and he reported the comments of wool and worsteddealers last week who said that business was very good. Mr. Ericksonreported a semi-annual conference held last week with economists frominsurance companies, banks, and other businesses. He summarized theirviews as recognizing the deceleration of growth, which might continueduring the second and third quarters of 1957. However, they antici-pated that the last quarter of this year would show an upward movement.As far as policy was concerned, Mr. Erickson said that hewould suggest no change in the discount rate or in the Committee'sdirective at this time. He agreed that the present degree of restraintshould be maintained. He would hesitate to name a figure of netborrowed reserves as a guide, although he would accept the $500 millionmentioned as a rough indicator.Mr. Balderston said that he was much impressed by the commentsmade by Mr. Irons regarding the concern in the Eleventh District as tocreeping inflation. He had had the feeling that it was the mission ofthe Federal Reserve to control the money supply so effectively that -36-inflationary tendencies might be curbed until such time as excesscapacities served as a brake on cost increases and wage advances.Mr. Balderston said that this led him to a problem for which he wasnot prepared to suggest a fully developed solution. He mentionedit now because June might be the only nearby time for the introduc-tion of a remedy on account of the Treasury's recurrent approachesto the market.He then made a statement substantially as followsThe problem has to do with facilitating the administra-tion of the discount window. I fear that we increased themoney supply inadvertently during the month of April throughmember-bank borrowing, some of which has been described ascomplacent. The total of member-bank borrowings rose to $1billion 50 million in the week of April 3, $1 billion 205million in the week of April 10, $1 billion 122 million inthe week of April 17. Chiefly because of the Railway Expressstrike it then dropped to $704 million for the week of May 1.At the end of the borrowing bulge, however, 107 Central Re-serve and Reserve City banks had borrowed continuously for7 weeks or more and 338 country banks for 4 or more borrow-ing periods. In short, the member banks seem to have takencare of the Treasury cash offer of March 28 and the Chicagotax situation of April 1 by borrowings at the discountwindow which had the effect of increasing the money supplyby perhaps $1 billion. This estimated increase, if accurate,carried the money supply (that is currency plus demand de-posits, excluding those of the U. S. Government) from $133.8billion at the end of March to $134.8 billion at the end ofApril. I point to this increase with some hesitation be-cause, although seasonally adjusted, one cannot be sure ofthe accuracy of the seasonal correction and of the influenceof random causes. The year-ago figures also increased be-tween the end of March and the end of April, and by $1 bil-lion 3 million, Moreover, the current estimate of $134.8might be looked upon by some as so close to the April totalof a year ago of $134.4 as not to cause concern.However, I am concerned that our instruments of controlneed to be perfected and that June may offer the only nearbyopportunity in which to do it. Those districts that have experienced trouble withcontinuous borrowers might wish to think of a penaltydiscount rate 1/2 per cent higher than the regular dis-count rate for those borrowers who come to the windowfor the third, or perhaps for the fifth successive dis-count period. Governor Coyne of Canada told us recentlythat he has used a penalty rate for banks that borrowmore than once within a month. Such a penalty might helpmake Federal Reserve or federal funds borrowing inter-mittent, and thus reduce the difficulties of discount-window administration. I am not suggesting that thisdevice would be needed by all districts or that it wouldbe appropriate for those banks having heavy seasonal loanfluctuations associated with cotton and other agriculturalproducts.I do not know whether a change in the discount ratewill be indicated by the state of business and of businesspsychology in June. If, however, some action at that timeis needed, it might take the form in one or more districtsof a penalty discount rate of 3-1/2 per cent for continuousborrowing, thus giving the System an opportunity to testout a new instrument of control while leaving the presentdiscount rate unchanged for the majority of member banks.Chairman Martin said that he was gratified with the thoughtfuland interesting way in which the members of the group had been ap-proaching the problems before it. He thought there was no greatproblem of a consensus this morning.The Committee, the Chairman said, was struggling with themost difficult and the only fundamental problem that the System faced--the medium of communication and how to handle the over-all problem.Mr. Mills had mentioned theory and practice. Chairman Martin wasconvinced that the answer was somewhere in the middle ground: ifthe Committee ignored theory completely, it would be in trouble, andif it ignored practice, it also would be in trouble. He agreed5/7/57-37- 5/7/57 -38-completely with Mr. Vardaman that a joint study of the institu-tional relations with the Treasury was the way to approach thatproblem. However, it must be recognized that under the presentstructural setup the Management of the Account had a very realproblem. It was dealing constantly with the Treasury, handlingits balances, its trust accounts, and other operations under thefiscal relationship on a day-to-day basis. A good many of theCommittee's critics believed that the present arrangement was toocumbersome and that it should be changed. A special committee wasnow reviewing the work that had been done by the Ad Hoc Subcommitteeseveral years ago on the question of internal operations, the Chair-man noted. It was also necessary to do some work on the problemthat Mr. Treiber had so adequately and clearly raised this morningconcerning the Treasury, about which there could be honest dif-ferences of opinion. However, the Chairman expressed his judgmentthat the present, with the possibility of a change in the manage-ment of the Treasury, was not a particularly good time for a jointstudy.Continuing, Chairman Martin said that it was important thatthe Committee know exactly what it was to study. He suggested thatMr. Rouse, as Manager of the Account, with the assistance of Messrs.Treiber and Riefler, bring together for all of the members of theCommittee as much information as possible regarding this problem. 5/7/57 -39-He thought that it would be necessary for all members of thegroup to do considerable reading and thinking about the problem.The Chairman went on to suggest that the Committee hadnot in the past been in a position to speak to the Treasury as aCommittee. The Treasury would discuss its problems with theManager of the Account, or with the Chairman of the Committee,when neither Mr. Rouse nor the Chairman or any other member ofthe Committee was in a position to say that the Committee haddiscussed the matter and that it had reached a judgment as aCommittee. The Committee should try to work toward a broad studyand to get in a position where it would be possible to say whatthe Committee's judgment was. None of the members of the groupshould underestimate the complexity or the nature of this problem,the Chairman said, noting that it was not a stationary problemand not one that could be resolved at a given time--rather it wasone that was continuously with the Committee.This was the problem the Manager of the Account was strugglingwith constantly, Chairman Martin said. The Committee should hammerout more clearly than it had to date just what procedures it wantedto follow. As Mr. Johns had suggested this morning in connectionwith the study of float, if all of us studied this problem indi-vidually we might not be quite as certain that we had the answerswhen questions arose. The Committee should work toward the joint 5/7/57 -40.study with the Treasury but what was needed fundamentally was areview of the ideas raised in the Ad Hoc Subcommittee report re-garding the position of the Manager of the Account, the New YorkBank, and the operations for the Treasury. All of these shouldbe put in focus, not as they were working at the moment but asthey were likely to work over the next few months. The Chairmansaid that he felt the Committee had been making progress and hewas not expressing dissatisfaction on what had been done thus far.The Committee should be encouraged that it had done as well as ithad with a difficult credit problem.Chairman Martin then referred to the comments of Mr.Balderston regarding a penalty discount rate. This should beconsidered in terms of public relations and public understandingas well as technicalities. Inflation is the most serious problemconfronting the countries of the Western World today, the Chairmansaid. He reported recent inquiries by two senators and a congress-man as to whether he could name any products that were in shortsupply. Personally, Chairman Martin said, he knew of nothing inshort supply at the moment but the essence of the problem waswhether the market was going to create the demand or whether wewere going to use borrowed money to take the products that werein supply; whether short-term credit would be used for long-termpurposes to create demand where there seemed to be temporary 5/7/57 -41-overcapacity or overproduction of some products. Mr. Young hadpresented the Committee with a paper on the basic economic problem.The Chairman said that he might not be able to name products thatwere now in short supply, but monetary policy could not be used torestore a price level that had been lost through inflationaryprocesses. The country was now operating at an inflated pricelevel and adjustments were taking place. The difficulty of passinghigher costs on to the consumer had increased, Chairman Martin said,and we were at the juncture where pressures would become increasinglygreat for creating demand by simply pumping up credit. This was thebasic problem in the struggle against inflation. The Committee couldexpect a good deal of questioning on this problem by Senator Byrd'sSenate Finance Committee in its forthcoming study. None of us be-lieve that money and credit policy can do the whole job of restrain-ing inflationary developments, the Chairman said, but a posture ofmonetary and credit policy that was set to counter such developmentswas infinitely more important in present circumstances than at anyother time. If the general posture of the Committee was right, theCommittee would then be discharging its responsibility.Chairman Martin then referred to the directive, stating thatit seemed clear that the consensus was to maintain essentially thestatus quo. There was no intention overtly to ease or overtly totighten the situation. The Manager of the Account would have toexercise his judgment. Since this was partly an institutional 5/7/57 -42-problem, the Committee should bear in mind that if the Treasuryshould run, say, $2 billion of attrition on its current refunding,the Treasury would have to obtain additional money somewhere.While he was not forecasting such a development, he felt itimportant that the Committee see both sides of the problem. Chair-man Martin then inquired whether there was any disagreement withthe consensus as he had stated it.Mr. Vardaman asked whether the Chairman's remark that heknew of no products now in short supply suggested that demand forthese goods would be increased if policy were relaxed and negativefree reserves were permitted to go to par.Chairman Martin responded that he didn't know but in hisjudgment such action would increase the inflationary pressures.Mr. Rouse said, in response to the Chairman's inquiry, thathe (the Chairman) had stated clearly the consensus as indicated atthis meeting. He would interpret this as giving him clearance tocontinue to assist dealers in the refunding through repurchaseagreements, if there should be a need for such assistance. However,he added that dealers were not buying "rights" in volume and hewould not expect a substantial need for repurchase agreements toemerge. Mr. Rouse noted that there had been several suggestionsas to the Treasury bill rate. While the System account did notnow have enough Treasury bills to influence the rate, Mr. Rouse feltthat the present level of bill rates was principally a reflection of 5/7/57-43-the desire for liquidity at the present time. It also reflectedSystem policy. He would not expect to attempt to influence thebill rate, but he would attempt to maintain the current level ofpressure until the next meeting of the Committee.Thereupon, upon motion duly madeand seconded, the Committee votedunanimously to direct the Federal Re-serve Bank of New York until otherwisedirected by the Committee:(1) To make such purchases, sales or exchanges(including replacement of maturing securities, and allow-ing maturities to run off without replacement) for theSystem open market account in the open market or, in thecase of maturing securities, by direct exchange with theTreasury, as may be necessary in the light of currentand prospective economic conditions and the general creditsituation of the country, with a view (a) to relating thesupply of funds in the market to the needs of commerceand business, (b) to restraining inflationary developmentsin the interest of sustainable economic growth whilerecognizing uncertainties in the business outlook, thefinancial markets, and the international situation, and(c) to the practical administration of the account: pro-vided that the aggregate amount of securities held in theSystem account (including commitments for the purchase orsale of securities for the account) at the close of thisdate, other than special short-term certificates of in-debtedness purchased from time to time for the temporaryaccommodation of the Treasury, shall not be increased ordecreased by more than $1 billion;(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for theaccount of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (withdiscretion, in cases where it seems desirable, to issueparticipations to one or more Federal Reserve Banks) suchamounts of special short-term certificates of indebtednessas may be necessary from time to time for the temporaryaccommodation of the Treasury; provided that the totalamount of such certificates held at any one time by theFederal Reserve Banks shall not exceed in the aggregate$500 million; 5/7/57 -44-(3) To sell direct to the Treasury from theSystem account for gold certificates such amounts ofTreasury securities maturing within one year as maybe necessary from time to time for the accommodationof the Treasury; provided that the total amount ofsuch securities so sold shall not exceed in theaggregate $500 million face amount, and such salesshall be made as nearly as may be practicable at theprices currently quoted in the open market.The Chairman then referred to items 4b and 4c on the agenda,4b relating to guides for open market operations to carry out Com-mittee policy, and 4c relating to the responsibilities of the Treas-ury and the Committee in the area of open market operations. Hesuggested that the general discussion of these matters that hadalready taken place might be sufficient for this meeting, and therewas no disagreement with this suggestion.Mr. Robertson stated that the Committee on Float (Messrs.Erickson, Johns, and Robertson, Chairman) had received from thesubcommittee a report dealing with the subject. He suggested thatcopies of the report be distributed to each Reserve Bank Presidentand to each Board Member, and it was understood that this procedurewould be followed.It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee wouldbe held at 10:00 a.m. on Tuesday, May 28, 1957.Thereupon the meeting adjourned.Secretary