 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was heldin the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal ReserveSystem in Washington on Tuesday, July 29, 1958, at 10:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Martin, ChairmanMr. Hayes, Vice ChairmanMr. BalderstonMr. FultonMr. IronsMr. LeachMr. MangelsMr. MillsMr. RobertsonMr. ShepardsonMr. VardamanMessrs. Erickson, Treiber, Allen, Johns, andDeming, Alternate Members of the FederalOpen Market CommitteeMessrs. Bopp, Bryan, and Leedy, Presidents ofthe Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,Atlanta, and Kansas City, respectivelyMr. Riefler, SecretaryMr. Thurston, Assistant SecretaryMr. Solomon, Assistant General CounselMr. Thomas, EconomistMessrs. Daane, Hostetler, Marget, Roelse,Walker, Wheeler, and Young, AssociateEconomistsMr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market AccountMr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary, Board ofGovernorsMr. Koch, Associate Adviser, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board ofGovernorsMr. Keir, Acting Chief, Government FinanceSection, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Stone, Manager, Securities Department,Federal Reserve Bank of New York 7/29/58 -2-Messrs. Ellis, Jones, and Tow, Vice Presi-dents of the Federal Reserve Banks ofBoston, St. Louis, and Kansas City,respectively; Mr. Baughman, AssistantVice President, Federal Reserve Bankof Chicago; Messrs. Anderson andAtkinson, Economic Advisers, FederalReserve Banks of Philadelphia andAtlanta, respectively; and Mr.Litterer, Business Economist, FederalReserve Bank of MinneapolisUpon motion duly made and seconded, andby unanimous vote, the minutes of the meetingof the Federal Open Market Committee held onJuly 8, 1958, were approved.Before this meeting there had been distributed to the membersof the Committee a report prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of NewYork covering open market operations during the period July 8 throughJuly 23, 1958, and a supplemental report covering commitments executedJuly 24 through July 28, 1958. Copies of both reports have beenplaced in the files of the Federal Open Market Committee.Reporting on open market operations, Mr. Rouse stated thateveryone present had followed market developments with particularinterest in recent weeks. The three-week period since the last meet-ing had opened with a short-lived rally following the Treasury'sannouncement that it had purchased $589 million of the 2-5/8 per centbonds of 1965, $56 million of which would be retired. This wasquickly followed, however, by the news of the Middle East crisiswhich, together with further evidence of improvement in businessconditions, led to substantial price declines heightened by liquida-tion of speculative positions. Mr. Rouse reported that since the 7/29/58 -3-last meeting total System purchases of Government securities otherthan bills amounted to $1,265 million on a commitment basis. Thisincluded $1,090 million new 1-5/8 per cent certificates on a when-issued basis and $175 million notes and bonds, of which $110 millionwere September rights. The System purchased $74.5 million bills inthe market while an additional $30 million were taken into the Accounton a swap with a foreign account. On the other hand, the SystemAccount made commitments for the redemption or sale of $704 millionbills during the three-week period.Mr. Rouse wont on to say that the money market had beengenerally easy, although there were one or two days earlier in theperiod when the Federal funds rate reached 1-5/8 per cent. Hestated that the amplified volume of free reserves in the bankingsystem did not seem to make any perceptible difference in marketatmosphere during the period. The early reception of the 1-1/2 percent tax anticipation certificates was satisfactory. There was somefeeling at the New York Bank that the rate might be on the low side,but market people seemed to think that the terms were satisfactory.Mr. Rouse went on to say that the Government securitiesmarket had a bad day yesterday, with some issues off as much as 1-1 1/4points. The offerings, mostly small in size, were largely from specu-lative sources, but there was a virtual absence of buying. The marketdeclined further in moonlight trading yesterday. Mr. Rouse reported 7/29/58that the average issuing rate in yesterday's bill auction was .98per cent, with the stop-out running to slightly above 1 per cent.At the request of the Chairman, the Secretary reviewed thetelephone meetings of the Committee held during the period fromJuly 15 through July 25, 1958, the minutes of some of which hadnot yet been distributed. He referred particularly to the actiontaken on July 18 authorizing the Manager of the System Account tobuy for the Account in the open market, without limitation, Govern-ment securities in addition to short-term securities, and to theaction taken on July 24 terminating that authority. In view of thelatter action, he said, the Management of the Account was now operatingunder the directive issued by the Committee at the meeting on July 8,1958.Chairman Martin inquired whether there was any question aboutthe effect of the July 24 action, as stated by the Secretary, and noquestions were raised.Thereupon, upon motion duly madeand seconded, and by unanimous vote,the open market transactions duringthe period July 8 through July 28,1958, were approved, ratified, andconfirmed.In supplementation of the staff memorandum distributed underdate of July 25, 1958, Mr. Young presented the following statementon the economic situationt 7/29/58Domestically, springback of economic activity hasbeen impressive, so much so that it now looks as if Aprilwill mark the recession trough and May the first month ofrevival. In industrial countries abroad, the situationlooks stronger than earlier reported, with possibilitythat depressed industries such as steel and textiles nowmay be a bit on the upgrade.While Middle East war threats have not resulted inscare inventory buying, according to district reports,shift towards inventory accumulation because of strongerfinal demands must surely be part of the explanation ofrecent pickup in output and improvement in the labor market.For some months, the equity market has reflected investorexpectations of inflationary revival. Recent stock price andtrading behavior would seem to indicate that latest informa-tion on financial factors--the very high current rates oftime deposit and monetary expansion, the continued ease ofbank reserve positions, the general state of abundantliquidity through the economy, and the Treasury's largedeficit--is being interpreted as confirmatory of inflationaryexpectations. Any other interpretation of recent stock marketaction is hard to make rational. Second quarter earningsreports for the 214 manufacturing companies so far reportingshow combined earnings 38 per cent below the second quarterof 1957 and up only 2 per cent from the first quarter of thisyear.As to details:The preliminary GNP estimate for the second quarter showsmodest rise from the first quarter, with about the same rateof inventory liquidation for the two quarters. The estimateof inventory liquidation, in the light of other evidence,looks high so that later downward revision of the inventoryliquidation estimate would not be surprising.Evidence accumulating on industrial production for Mayand June confirms the broad range of increased output reportedat the last meeting. Even equipment and ordnance industries,which had been declining for more than a year, experiencedmodest rise. Output in consumer lines was at a rate only 5per cent under a year ago. Output of materials and parts wasalso up sharply, and farm machinery output rose. New ordersfor machine tools have edged up in the past sixty days.It now appears that steel activity and automobileassemblies in July will experience only a seasonal decline.With strength continuing to feature output in many otherindustries, it seems possible that a further one point rise-5- 7/29/58in the index of industrial production will be recorded forJuly.Latest data on the labor market in May and June alsoconfirm broad strengthening of employment demand. The Junerise in unemployment was about seasonal and was mainly ac-counted for by the addition of students and graduates tothe labor force. June unemployment among workers 25 yearsor more of age stabilized, and long-duration unemploymentdeclined.In July, initial claims for unemployment have declinedfurther--to about a third ahead of a year ago compared withthree-fifths ahead of last year in May and June. Incidentally,the longer hours worked per week in May and June raised sharplyaverage weekly earnings in manufacturing. At $83.10, Juneweekly earnings averaged $2.30 above April and were higher thanany month last year.Construction activity in July is currently estimated tobe rising further, with residential up sharply, public con-struction up some, and industrial construction again down.Contract awards just reported for June show the highest volumerecorded for any single month on record--an eighth higher thanin May and almost a fifth higher than June a year ago.In June, one out of three housing starts was govern-mentally underwritten, compared with one out of six suchstarts in the first quarter. Requests for FHA and VA ap-praisals are still rising in July. Mortgage funds now arereported to be generally available for FHA financing andavailable in about half of the metropolitan areas for VAfinancing. Downdrift in mortgage rates has apparently haltedtemporarily, but the wider gap between bond and mortgageyields established early in the year still prevails, makingmortgages very attractive to lenders.Personal income, which at $352 billion in June was aboutback to the level of last August, is confidently estimated tobe rising further in July. This July rise is reflecting thepay raise for Federal employees, with full impact of theretroactive increase, plus additional benefits to unemployedworkers under the Temporary Unemployment Compensation Act,plus higher wage payments generally for more hours workedand more employed workers.Department store sales, seasonally adjusted, hit theirrecession low in February. Subsequently, they have risensteeply. The preliminary level estimated for July putsdepartment store sales about one per cent higher than a yearago.Automobile sales in the first twenty days of July wereclearly improved from the first twenty days of June, running-6- 7/29/58a fifth under last year compared with over a fourth lessin the first six months. With dealer stocks furtherreduced about 20,000 units, manufacturers have raisedsomewhat their production schedules for July.Consumer instalment credit, from preliminary indications,continued to liquidate in June, though at a somewhat slowerrate, again mainly due to a reduced origination of new carpaper in automobile financing. Repossession and delinquencyrates, though higher than a year ago, have shown persistentdowndrift in recent months.The decline in foreign demand for American exports hasapparently leveled off, and perhaps demand has revivedmoderately. Figures for May, the latest month for which areport is at hand, show fairly consistent marks of pickup.Meanwhile, American import demands apparently continue tohold steady.Crop prospects continue to indicate a harvest equal topeak years. Net farm income for the first six months wasthe highest since 1953 and over a fifth ahead of the firsthalf of last year.Average wholesale prices have risen half a per centsince mid-June, wiping out the decline from the March peak.Especially important in the recent rise has been the advancein prices of industrial materials. Price increases haveoccurred for scrap metals, copper, tin, rubber, wool andcotton textiles, hides, plywood, coal, and fuel oils. Theaverage of finished goods prices has apparently held stable;one noteworthy price advance, however, was a 3 per cent in-crease for automobile tires. Farm prices since mid-Junehave experienced some decline but less than in the precedingmonth. The decline this past month has reflected lowerprices for livestock and some further decline in fresh fruitand vegetable prices, offset by a modest advance in grainprices.Average consumer prices rose fractionally again in June.The further rise was accounted for entirely by a moderatefurther advance in price for services. The July index ofconsumer prices is expected to show little change from June.Abroad, in Western Europe, there has evidently been somedecline in industrial activity from the first to the secondquarter, mainly reflecting liquidation of steel and textileinventories. With other demands holding up, there is nowmore optimism with respect to activity over the balance ofthe year. In Canada and Japan, activity in recent monthshas been showing moderate rise. Elsewhere the situation is 7/29/58not apparently worsening, except financially; inflationaryproblems of many development and material areas continueto be acute.Mr. Thomas made the following statement with regard to financialdevelopments:During the past two weeks System operations have beenlargely concerned with techniques of market manipulationat the sacrifice of the objective aims of adjusting mone-tary availability to current economic needs. Whether andhow these operations might have been avoided present ques-tions of judgment and opinion to which there are no preciseanswers. The important problem now is how to return tooperations directed toward the major objectives of Systempolicy.The principal reasons for the weakness in Treasury bondprices, which occasioned the support action, are varied butfairly clear. They include: the technical position of themarket resulting from the large build-up of speculativepositions in bonds by temporary holders led on by expecta-tions of continued declines in interest rates, the largevolume of Treasury borrowing in prospect for coming months,the growing feeling that incipient economic recovery willbe accompanied by rising interest rates; and finally theuncertainties arising from mid-East difficulties.The middle two of these factors--economic recovery andheavy Treasury borrowing--are likely to be continuing in-fluences for many months ahead. Their conjuncture presentsproblems for Federal Reserve policies. The task before thisCommittee is to adjust its policies to deal with these forces.They will presumably bring about expansion in credit demands.Unless these demands are met from current savings or exist-ing liquidity, there will be pressure for increased bankcredit and also for rising interest rates. Any attempt tokeep interest rates from rising would hamper the allocationprocesses of credit markets and interfere with the use ofexisting savings to meet credit demands. It would alsocause an expansion in bank credit and in the money supplythat would sooner or later become inflationary. Interestrates should be permitted to adjust to market forces, withno more expansion in bank reserves than is needed for sus-tained economic growth without inflation.-8- 7/29/58Under pressures that have already developed, bondyields have risen sharply since mid-June. Long-termGovernment bonds rose from an average of 3.14 per centto 3.40 per cent, and Treasury issues maturing in threeto five years rose from 2.1 per cent to over 2.50 percent. Outstanding high-grade corporate bonds rose moremoderately from 3.56 to 3.70 per cent. Offering yieldson new issues have had to be raised. Bond yields arehigher than at any time this year and are generally aboveyields that prevailed prior to late 1956. Short-termrates have fluctuated somewhat but those on Treasury billshave continued at a low level as investors have soughtliquidity. Coupon rates on recent new short-term Treasuryissues have been higher than the 1-1/4 per cent rate onthe June offering.Current estimates of Treasury borrowing needs, afterallowance for market support operations and actual andprospective attrition, indicate borrowing of $9 billionor more by the end of December. These can be covered bythe $3.5 billion tax certificates now being offered, byan additional $3 billion of borrowing around mid-October,by an increase of $100 million each in ten of the weeklybill issues at some time during the autumn, and possiblyby another cash offering of some $2 billion in December.This volume of borrowing, together with a reduction ofabout $4.5 billion in the Treasury's cash balance, wouldcover a half-year cash deficit of $10 billion and cashredemption of outstanding debt of About $4 billion (in-cluding some agency issues).It is estimated that even with an economic recoveryequalling that of 1954-55, the Treasury's cash deficitfor this fiscal year as a whole would be around $9 billion,but a higher figure is likely. To cover debt retirementthat will occur in the last half of the fiscal year sub-stantial additional cash borrowing would be necessary inthat period. Assuming a reduction of about $5 billionin the exceptionally large cash balance of the Treasuryat the beginning of the fiscal year, the net increase inthe public debt both for the first half and for the fiscalyear as a whole would be about $5 billion. The absorptionof this amount of securities by investors should not be aninsurmountable obstacle, although the flotation of perhapsas much as $18 billion of new issues in the course of theyear presents formidable problems.The striking development of this year has been thecontinued large demands on the capital market by business 7/29/58corporations, as well as by State and local governments.New corporate issues in July, swelled by the U. S. SteelCorporation $300 million offering, amounted to about $1,150million, an amount exceeded in only three months of thepast two years. Offerings by State and local governments,at $575 million, were larger than had been expected,although less than in several earlier months of the year.These various issues have been successfully floated not-withstanding unsettlement in the Government securitiesmarkets, but yields have been higher than earlier in theyear.Calendars of new issues for August are light, as isgenerally the case in that month. With capital expenditurescontinuing to decline in the months ahead, corporate borrow-ing should decline, and corporations might also be able torebuild their liquidity.Common stock prices have risen to new high levels forthe year and are only moderately below the peak of a yearago, with trading volume heavy, despite reports of decliningcorporate earnings. There has been a moderate increase instock market credit.Total loans and investments at city banks declined bynearly $2 billion in the four weeks ending July 23, followingan increase of $3.7 billion in the preceding four weeks. Thesubstantial net increase for the eight weeks compares with nonet change in the same period last year. In July of this yearbanks showed declines in their loans on securities and theirholdings of securities, which had increased even more sharplyin June. The July decline in business loans exceeded themoderate June increase, in contrast to last year when theJuly decline was much less than the sharp expansion in June.U. S. Government deposits at city banks declined in thefour weeks ending July 23 by nearly $4 billion, slightlyexceeding the increase of the preceding four weeks. At leasthalf of the funds thus distributed were apparently used forreduction of bank credit and some went into the build-up ofother deposits. Demand deposits adjusted, which had shownlittle change in June, increased by over $1.1 billion inthe past four weeks, in contrast to a small decline in thesame period last year. Last year in July there was a muchgreater than seasonal increase in demand deposits, but mostof it occurred at banks outside leading cities. Presumablythe increase for all banks in July this year will exceedthat of last year. This would raise the seasonally-adjustedfigure of the money supply above the peak reached a year ago.-10- 7/29/58Interbank deposits at city banks have increased somewhatmore so far in July than they did in the same period lastyear, indicating some accumulation of funds by nonreportingbanks. The recent growth in time deposits practicallyended in July.Member bank reserve needs declined in July as a resultof a $360 million decrease in required reserves and a smalldecline in currency in circulation. Both of these decreaseswere somewhat less than had been projected on the basis ofthe usual seasonal pattern, reflecting the previously men-tioned seasonally adjusted increase in the money supply.Reserves were absorbed by a reduction of close to $400 mil-lion in the System portfolio and by a further gold outflowof a little over $100 million. The gold outflow hasslackened compared with previous months, while foreignershave increased somewhat their dollar assets. Weekly averagefree reserves moved within a range of $450 million to $700million. They are expected to average about $500 millionin the current statement week.Next week, reserves will be supplied by System paymentfor the new certificates and released by a decrease in re-quired reserves resulting from a continued drop in Treasurytax and loan balances. Allowing for a runoff in Systemholdings of this week's bill maturities (not included inestimates shown in the table) and other factors absorbingreserves, free reserves may average close to $1.2 billion,in the absence of further System operations. They will bereduced next week by over $200 million as a result of arequired reserve rise resulting from the Treasury cashfinancing, partly offset by other factors. If System hold-ings of bills are reduced, free reserves might decline toabout $800 million. Assuming usual seasonal changes inmonetary demands without expansion, a further moderate out-flow of gold, and some further Treasury cash financing,free reserves would be likely to continue close to or above$700 million until late in October.In order to avoid an undue expansion of bank credit,greater restraint than that would presumably be required.To reduce free reserves below the $500 million level wouldcall for sales of about $300 million of bills in additionto redeeming System holdings of regular maturities this weekand next.With the level of reserves prevailing and the largevolume of cash redemptions of recent maturing Treasury-11- 7/29/58 -12-securities, funds should be available in the money marketto absorb such a reduction in the System's portfolio, aswell as to take on the new Treasury offer of tax anticipa-tion certificates. The delicate question is what might bethe effect of such operations upon a bond market that isin the process of adjusting to an expected and probablyinevitable higher level of interest rates. It is possiblethat any attempt to retard this adjustment by supportoperations may only make it more severe in the end.Chairman Martin noted that the next regular meeting of theCommittee was scheduled for Tuesday, August 19. In looking back,he thought it was a good thing that the policy directive was notchanged at the meeting three weeks ago. However, he hoped that eachperson in his remarks today would direct attention to clause (b) ofthe directive. The Treasury offering would be over tonight, and theTreasury then would be out of the market for about two months. There-fore, it seemed advisable in the discussion today to consider whatshould be done to meet the situation. For clause (b) of the directive,the Secretary had suggested "to recapturing redundant reserves,"while he (Chairman Martin) had in mind "to absorbing reserves when-ever consistent with an orderly market." While he did not feel thatthere should be any dramatic change in the directive, the words "tocontributing further by monetary ease" seemed to him to be inappro-priate at this time.The Chairman then turned to Mr. Hayes, who presented thefollowing statement of his views on the business outlook and creditpolicy: 7/29/58 -13-Both current statistical data and the recent improve-ment in business sentiment suggest that an uptrend in eco-nomic activity may now be under way. Considerable doubtremains, however, as to whether expansionary forces willgather much momentum before autumn and whether the recoverywill be vigorous enough to result in a satisfactory rate ofutilization of labor and plant capacity by the year-end oreven in early 1959.The crisis in the Middle East has injected major newuncertainties into the outlook, and we cannot ignore thepossibility that it may trigger a strongly inflationary trend.So far, however, there is fortunately no convincing indicationof such a development. The initial speculative flurry in thecommodity markets accompanying the outbreak of the crisis ap-pears to have lost most of its steam, and informal inquirieswe have made provide no evidence at all of a rush towardprecuationary buying on the part of either business firms orconsumers. We discussed this point at last week's directorsmeeting, and the above view was confirmed unanimously. Imight add, just as a matter of interest, that our directorsexpressed the hope that direct price and wage controls wouldbe initiated immediately if our forces should become involvedin actual fighting in the Middle East, in order to avoid thekind of price movement which we experienced in the Koreacrisis.It does seem likely that at a minimum the heightenedinternational tensions will lead to widespread reconsidera-tion of inventory policies both because of greater emphasison the need for ample supplies in the event of a suddenemergency and because of greater expectation that priceincreases may now be effected more readily than had pre-viously been considered likely, with the Middle East crisisserving as a catalyst. In my view, slackening in the rateof inventory liquidation has probably already been a majorcause of the upturn in business to date, together withsome improvement in final demand, and this trend may beexpected to continue.The recent gains in gross national product, industrialproduction, employment and average hours worked are en-couraging, as are the pronounced upswing in housing starts,the increase in defense orders, and the demonstratedstability of consumer spending, which should continue tomake a good showing under the influence of rising personalincome and somewhat more optimistic consumer attitudes.Reports that the decline in corporate profits may have 7/29/58been slowed or even reversed in the second quarter mayhave encouraging longer-run implications with respectto plant and equipment spending programs.On the other hand, I still feel some concern overthe probability that even a rather substantial advancein over-all business activity during the remainder ofthe year could still leave a relatively high level ofunemployment if "latent" productivity gains built intothe economy as a result of the recent investment boomare translated into actual gains as the rate of plantutilization rises. There is also a possibility that,in the absence of any sharp forward push in major areasof final demand, the upswing might lose its momentumafter a few months and thus fail to maintain soundrecovery.The current cash financing of the Treasury is some-what larger than had been expected before it became clearthat an abnormally high attrition in the recent refundingwas inevitable. I must confess that I have some qualmsas to the rate which has been set for the new tax certifi-cates, as it seems to be uncomfortably close to the market,whereas some leeway would have seemed desirable in view ofthe experience with the refunding. At least it is asatisfaction to know that the Treasury should now be outof the market until October. It is also good to know thatthe Treasury is moving now to obtain a more realistic debtceiling which should prevent a recurrence of last fall'sartificial Treasury financing problems.In the area of bank credit, the four weeks to July 16witnessed a sharp reduction in loans and investments--equivalent to something less than half of the increase ofthe preceding four weeks. According to our estimates, theseasonally adjusted money supply at the end of June,although showing an annual rate of increase of 2.7 percent over the December figure, was still $1 billion belowthe peak of last summer. But, with the prospect that thebanks will be called on to finance the major portion ofthe Treasury's deficit in the second half of the year,and after allowing for seasonal loan expansion, theseasonally adjusted money supply may increase rapidlyduring the latter half of the year. However, if we viewthis in longer perspective, the growth in money supplyfor the four years 1955-58, even with an increase of, say,6 per cent this year, would average a little over 2 percent per annum, which does not appear unreasonable.-14- 7/29/58-15-As for policy, the growing evidence of business improve-ment, together with the possibility that the degree of easeprevailing in recent months might produce a very rapid ex-pansion in bank credit and the money supply, raises thequestion whether we should consider some modification of thisdegree of ease. My view, however, is that there will be timeto consider such a move after an additional month or two ofobservation, which might permit a better appraisal both ofthe vigor of the recovery and of the danger of a crisis-induced inflationary trend. In the meantime, we shouldprobably be content to restore free reserves to about thelevel of $500 million prevailing up to the time of therecent Treasury refunding. (Parenthetically, I might saythat while the figures are distorted and we are prospectivelyrunning way above that this week, I do not think that interms of actual atmosphere there has been any material changefrom the degree of ease prevailing before the recent upsetmarket.) This will undoubtedly call for some outright salesin addition to bill runoffs, and besides bills it may proveuseful to sell some of the System Account's certificates tohelp meet this need without unduly depleting our bill holdings.At the same time we cannot overlook the fact that the Govern-ment securities market is understandably still in a veryuneasy state, based in good part on fears of a change inmonetary policy, and that we may conceivably be faced with arecurrence of disorderly conditions in the coming weeks.Furthermore, I am troubled by the thought that the risein bond yields may conceivably have carried far enough toconstitute a threat to the recovery process. It seems to methat we should resist any further deterioration in the capitalmarkets and do what we can to promote stability and eventualstrengthening of these markets. Admittedly I am puzzled asto how this can best be done.Under these circumstances, and especially in view oftoday's Treasury cash offering, I would prefer at this timenot to alter the directive by eliminating the word "further"from the phrase "contributing further by monetary ease toresumption of stable growth of the economy"--although itmay be well to do so or to make some other change in wordingat an early subsequent meeting. I would therefore feelinclined not to adopt the wording that has been proposed bythe Secretary. Believing as I do that we should avoid atthis time even any suggestion that we may contemplate achange in basic policy, I would be opposed to a change indiscount rates. Although the recent growth in stock marketcredit suggests that it would be well to keep this areaunder close surveillance, the growth has not been of such 7/29/58 -16-magnitude as to provide justification at this point forconsidering higher stock margin requirements. Finally,in view of the continued unsettled conditions in the U.S. Government securities market and the delicate inter-national situation, I think it would be unwise to makeany public statement indicating termination of the in-structions, publicly announced on July 18, by the Com-mittee to the Manager of the Account to purchaseGovernment securities in addition to short-termGovernment securities.Mr. Johns said that although there appeared to be evidence,perhaps convincing evidence, that some improvement in business hadoccurred, was occurring, and might continue to occur, he had not yetbeen able to reach the conclusion that the time to indicate a changein policy--at least a radical change in policy--had arrived. Althoughit would appear that reserve projections were much higher than wouldhave been the case except for the events of the last ten days--perhaps higher than the Committee would like them to be-- he had thefeeling that rapid steps to absorb redundant reserves--assuming thatanyone knew how many were redundant--might be misconstrued. It washis feeling that, at least for a while, the toleration of someredundant reserves might not be harmful, and therefore he would beinclined to move cautiously rather than precipitately.Mr. Johns said that he had not come to this meeting preparedto argue for a change in the directive and that, for reasons whichhe was not able to state clearly, he felt unsatisfied with the sug-gestion that the Committee merely say in clause (b) that operationswere going to be conducted with a view toward absorbing redundant 7/29/58 -17-reserves. Instead of language along these lines, he would preferto leave the directive about as it stood. He would be a littlemore inclined than Mr. Hayes to argue for a change in marginrequirements. Although some might say that the increase in stockmarket credit outstanding was not unduly large, it was continuingand had been going on for some time. In the circumstances it mightbe that the Board could appropriately conclude that it should attemptto slow down the utilization of credit for that purpose.Mr. Bryan made substantially the following statement:Economic statistics in the Sixth District give an in-creasingly clear picture of economic recovery. It is ourjudgment that national economic statistics also give thesame increasingly clear picture.The matter of overshadowing importance at this time,however, seems to be the extremely grave problem of managingmonetary policy and Government finance. It is my ownjudgment that it would be only the slightest exaggeration tosay that we face in monetary policy and national finance asituation of approaching crisis. This situation is com-pounded of a number of elements, all of them tending to becumulative rather than self-cancelling.1. Economic recovery is obviously in process. Theprocess will be stimulated in the next several months asGovernment spending from deficit finance is piled on topof a natural economic recovery and the Government deficitsappear as private deposits available for expenditure. Theprocess of economic recovery, in the light of recenthistory, creates the expectation of an upward adjustment ininterest rates.2. The natural adjustment of interest rates upward iscompounded by a genuine loss of confidence in the futureintegrity of the dollar as a store of value. There has beencontinuous, pervasive, and increasingly convincing propagandato the effect that inflation is inevitable. That propagandanow carries almost universal conviction. Such an almostuniversal conviction means that the increase of yields onfixed income obligations is destined to be greater than would 7/29/58be likely as an uncomplicated response to economicrecovery.3. The problem of yields on fixed income obliga-tions is increased by the fact that the banking systemhas intended to use its increased security holdings andsecurity loans, on some timely occasion, to provide thecash requisite to the acquisition of higher yieldingloans. The same is true in varying degree of otherinvestors and investing institutions. This means thatwe are likely to face a continuing, though probablyirregular, attempted liquidation of Government securitiesfrom these sources in the next several months.4. The normal liquidation for the purpose of usingfixed income securities as a source of cash has been in-creased by the revulsion in Government security prices.The revulsion itself has created in both the banking andnonbanking groups a large number of unwilling holders ofGovernment and other fixed income securities.5. The perversity of markets being what it is, theprospective increase in yields is likely to have the effectof hastening and of increasing fixed income offerings asborrowers endeavor to advantage themselves by getting aheadof anticipated increases in yields.6. The sophisticated investment public has been shockedby an ill-considered Treasury support operation in the 2-5/8s.The sophisticated investing community has been even moreshocked by the System's operation that began on the presumptionof correcting disorder but that turned promptly into one ofthe most massive support operations ever undertaken. Theshock has been the greater because the support operation hasbeen so resounding a failure and because it seems to fore-cast the use of the Federal as a complaisant medium of infla-tion.We will be well advised in such a situation, I think,not to be deceived by the possibility of temporary ralliesor the assurances of bond dealers or possibly institutionalinvestors. The wound to confidence in my opinion goes toodeep for simple reassurance or for cure by exhortation.We will do better to listen to the investor who says,"I intend to get out of bonds on the first rally but thinkI am foolish. I'd probably better dump my bonds now.".. tothe investment house that says, "Bonds are out the windowfor anyone who wants to keep his money"....to the bankerwho says, "I used to think there was some hope of stoppinginflation. Now, I guess there really isn't a chance...."-18- 7/29/58These are just overheard by chance in a single minortown, Atlanta.What I am trying to say in listing the foregoing pointsis that, in my judgment, we are facing a very real deteriora-tion of confidence, approaching crisis proportions within theforeseeable future. Under such circumstances, the fundamentalproblem, both for the System and the Treasury, is the restora-tion of confidence in the future of the dollar. This will notbe easily accomplished, but all other monetary and economicproblems pale into insignificance.In approaching the solution to the problem a recognitionmust be had of certain points:a) We face the real possibility of a radical adjustmentof interest rates upward, the more particularly in the longersectors of the market, and more or less despite anything thatthe System can do about it. If this be considered an alarmistpossibility, we should ask ourselves, "Who wants a long bond,or even an intermediate obligation, if he is convinced thatinflation is a continuing certainty?" If it be believed thatwe can stop the adjustment by supplying unlimited reserves tothe banking system, then we should recall that the investmentcommunity and a considerable segment of the public at largeis now sufficiently sophisticated to realize that our actionsimply makes inflation the more certain, so that, by an un-limited supply of reserves in an effort to prevent the upwardadjustment of yields, we confront ourselves with the prob-ability of a perverse effect, our very action increasing theseverity of the adjustment apparently in the making.b) We should also recognize that if we stand in the wayof the market, whether on the theory of nudging or probing oron the basis of some preconceived yield, or in an effort,sincere though mistaken, to do the Treasury a favor, we arelikely to wind up by monetizing a considerable fraction ofthe public debt and, as said, making the revulsion againstfixed income obligations, now a probability, practically acertainty.c) The Treasury is under the necessity of getting thenational finances in order. A deficit of insignificant pro-portions, when related to the gross national product and,indeed, even desirable as an encouragement to economicrecovery, now contains the seeds of disaster when consideredin the light of what I would call a rapidly developing con-fidence crisis.Now we have the question of what can be done. I thinkthat the first step to take is to resolve that we will not-19- 7/29/58stand in the way of yield readjustments. The faster thosecome the better. We should assist them by getting free re-serves below $500 million and getting them there promptly.Also, at some opportune time the public should be reassuredthat the System is not going to be an engine of inflation.I do not quite know how you give that assurance except toincrease the discount rate at the first opportunity. Thesesteps all entail risks, risks that none of us would haveimagined three weeks ago but which must be accepted in orderto avoid greater risks. That we are compelled to accept themis the consequence of recent events and recent policy.I am in favor of changing the directive.Mr. Bopp made substantially the following statement:In general, business developments in the Third Districtcontinue to show some improvement. There has been a markedchange to a more optimistic attitude toward the business ot-look. Businessmen report that inventory liquidation has beenmostly completed and that employment prospects are improvingslowly.The Mideast crisis is reported to have had practicallyno effect as yet. Businessmen indicate no moves to restock,and there is no evidence of anticipatory spending by consumers.There are reports that labor unions, with contracts coming upfor renegotiation, would like to delay such negotiations untilthe foreign situation clarifies.Several problems confront the System in the realm ofmonetary policy. The immediate problem is to work down thelevel of free reserves, now projected at nearly $1.2 billionfor the week ending August 6, to a more appropriate level.This requires either liquidation of earning assets or an in-crease in nonreserve liabilities.Substantial liquidation of bills should be pursued eventhough the yields might rise to, say, 1-1/4 per cent so longas this does not unsettle the money and capital markets un-duly. At the same time it would seem appropriate to attemptto negotiate with the Treasury an increase in its balance atthe Reserve Banks to absorb reserves for a temporary periodas needed. The inherent merit of this move is reinforced bythe fact that the excess reserves were created in support ofthe Treasury financing.An even more difficult problem, though not perhaps asurgent, is whether operations outside the short-term marketshould be limited to purchases and thus become a one-way-20- 7/29/58 -21-street. If so, over time we will tie up more and moreof our resources and thus reduce our ability to restrict.The portfolio of short securities sets the limit to theamount of reserves that can be absorbed through theirliquidation. Although the System is not near that limitat the moment, it might be well to consider the possi-bilities of liquidating other than the shortest issues onappropriate occasions, as in periods of restraint, ratherthan defer such liquidation until the portfolio of billshas been exhausted.With regard to the directive, I would be in favor ofa change of the general type mentioned by Chairman Martin,that is, to absorb reserves consistent with an orderlymarket.Mr. Fulton reported that in the Fourth District there seemedto be a change in sentiment, a feeling that the last quarter of theyear would be materially better than the present level of activity.The steel industry, he said, was reporting a better July than it hadat first anticipated, with some orders coming in for August andSeptember delivery, particularly in the automotive field. It wasreported that all segments of users were buying some steel, mostlyas the result of over-liquidation of inventories. However, unemploy-ment was not being relieved to the extent that the increase in activitywould seem to warrant. It would seem that there had been some addi-tions to productivity and, as Mr. Hayes had said, the unemploymentfigures might be something to conjure with for some time. Capitalinvestments, it seemed, were not going to take the same number ofmen as heretofore.Mr. Fulton said he agreed that the open market operation inwhich the System had just participated was a saving one--or designed 7/29/58 -22-to be to some extent a saving one--for the Treasury. To retain inthe System Account indefinitely the securities which had been pur-chased would deprive the System of a flexibility that it needed.Therefore, he would favor running off those issues, or other issuesin the short-term sector, and he felt that those in the market wouldunderstand such an operation. Inasmuch as the Committee had an-nounced that the System was going into the market for a definitepurpose, there should be no one-way street and the System shouldhave the right to come out again.Mr. Fulton said he concurred in the feeling that the increasein stock market credit had been very substantial and that an upwardrevision in margin requirements might be appropriate. It would havea sobering effect on the gyrations of the stock market and it wouldhave a salutary effect on the long-term end of the bond market.Mr. Fulton went on to say that the System should absorb thelarge accumulation of reserves in the banks as rapidly as possiblewithout upsetting the market. They might be dormant at presentbecause of the rapidity with which they were created, but they wouldnot stay that way very long and System operations therefore should beaimed at reducing them very materially.Mr. Fulton said he thought it would be appropriate to changethe policy directive, possibly along the lines of some of the di-rectives that the Committee had issued at times in the past which 7/29/58 -23-indicated a desire to sustain growth in the economy without en-couraging inflationary influences.Mr. Shepardson said that Mr. Bryan had stated eloquentlyhis own feeling about the present situation. As far as the generaleconomy was concerned, he thought that there had been clear evidenceof some change in direction. While one could not yet say thatdevelopments were reaching an explosive point on the upside, theevidence of a change in the offing had exerted an effect on thetotal market situation. With respect to the exercise that theSystem had gone through during the past several days, he did notunderstand at the time, and he still did not see, to what extentthe System had helped. However, regardless of the effect of theTreasury financing the operation had put the System in a positionfrom which it must extricate itself as promptly as possible.Mr. Shepardson said that he saw a great deal in Mr. Bryan'sthesis of a loss of confidence. When the economy moved into a down-turn, the System had moved aggressively to make possible a recovery,but with frequent statements that at the appropriate time it musthave the courage to move with equal vigor on the other side. Thedevelopments of the last week, he said, made it necessary to movevigorously at this time to absorb some of the redundant reserves,and in so doing the Account should not necessarily limit itself tobills but use any appropriate action that could be taken. As 7/29/58quickly as possible, the Committee should try to recapture theposition that it had lost in this recent period.Mr. Shepardson said that he would favor a change in thepolicy directive along the lines that Chairman Martin had indicated.Mr. Robertson made the following statement:I have spent some time trying to ferret out the goodaspects of such a miserable bit of monetary-policy back-sliding as has been witnessed over the past ten days, andhave found some in the form of lessons:1. Not only must we be on our guard against panickyreactions in such circumstances--all of us, I suppose, arenow only too alert to that danger--but we must also bewareof being so wary of that hazard that we do not act withsufficient speed and decisiveness when the situation reallydemands it. We responded too readily to the cry of "Wolf!"on this occasion, and we may do so again; but such ex-periences must not cause us to disregard the warning signsand remain passive and complacent when the situation actuallycalls for vigorous measures.2. The experience indicates the need for being moreexplicit in our directions to the Manager of the Account sothat we cannot be so easily maneuvered from an action "tocorrect a disorderly market" to one designed to "support aTreasury issue."3. The experience indicates the futility of "support"actions. We add to the reserve supply at a time when weshould be reducing it and still by such action we do notprevent attrition in substantial amounts, which, of course,is the motivating reason for the action. At the same timeby adding to the money supply at exactly the wrong time wemultiply the difficulties of making monetary policy an ef-fective instrument in maintaining a proper economicequilibrium.4. The experience also shows how easy it is to slip--once you have gone off the wagon--and do things which youlater hate to try to justify but which at the time seemedworth doing--I refer, of course, to "swaps." We should notengage in swap transactions even when, as in this case, itseemed to be to our advantage to do so.We must put the experience of this past ten days behindus and strike out on the basis of the lessons with energyand rectitude to get back on the straight and narrow path, 7/29/58 -25-the path of monetary righteousness--a path which permitsmonetary policy to be most effective in keeping the moneysupply in proper relationship to economic conditions,without being warped out of shape and effectiveness bybeing used for such purposes as underwriting Treasuryissues and altering interest yields and prices in varioussegments of the Government bond market in accordance withsome preconceived pattern which does not seem to jibewith the forces of the market place.If we believe in a free market--as I trust we do--wemust permit it to function even when its results seem toveer from our own concept of a proper pattern and evenwhen it seems to be creating difficulties for the Treasuryin its financing program.Mr. Robertson said he would take it for granted from the re-ports of Mr. Young, Mr. Thomas, and others around the table thateconomic conditions unquestionably were on the upswing and that theCommittee's policy of monetary ease, as indicated in the currentpolicy directive, was no longer appropriate. As to operations,there should be a tightening to the fullest extent possible byrunoffs and sales of bills and other short-term securities. Per-haps this should be augmented by changes in reserve requirementsand margin requirements. However, the longer-run view would indi-cate that those actions might not be appropriate now; they might beneeded later on when inflationary pressures call for vigorouscountering moves.Mr. Robertson said he agreed with those who had advocated achange in clause (b) of the policy directive and would suggest "toabsorb reserves to the fullest extent consistent with an orderlymarket." Language of that kind would put emphasis on the need for for absorbing reserves but would provide also for maintaining aconsistent position.Mr. Mills said that the month of July 1958 was going to berecorded in the history of the Federal Reserve System as a turningpoint. None could argue that this was not a period that would takehard thinking and require hard decisions. Mr. Mills said that heshared all of Mr. Bryan's concern about the deterioration of con-fidence in the financial community. However, his own approach tothe correction of that kind of a situation was exactly opposite,and he would like to make the case for intervening to support theGovernment securities market.Mr. Mills then made the following statement:The Federal Open Market Committee is faced with thedifficult decision of whether to(1) allow prices on U. S. Government securities tofind a new trading level unassisted by FederalReserve System action; or(2) vigorously support the U. S. Government securi-ties market.It is argued that if let alone, the U. S. Governmentsecurities market will settle down to a new low level ofprices at which two-way trading will resume actively. Infavor of keeping the Federal Reserve System out of the mar-ket, it is further argued that the drastic drop that hastaken place in the prices of U. S. Government bonds reflectsa realistic alignment of long-term interest rates to apossibly protracted period of international emergency andto a return to a Federal Reserve System policy of creditrestraint to control incipient inflationary pressures thatare making their appearance along with rising businessactivity. Fundamentally, those who favor a hands-offapproach to Federal Reserve System policy action placeeconomic considerations ahead of the growing threat of afinancial emergency.7/29/58-26- 7/29/58In the light of the present situation and especiallybecause of yesterday's further substantial drop in theprices of U. S. Government securities, there are cogentreasons for attacking the financial emergency in advanceof developing Federal Reserve System credit policy solelyfor economic considerations. In my belief, the FederalReserve System would err in allowing prices for U. S.Government securities to suffer further serious reductionsor to temporize with such a situation by half-hearted sup-port actions undertaken at succeedingly lower stages inthe prices of U. S. Government securities. Such a policywould tend to force U. S. Government bond prices steadilylower, increase the volume of offerings, and threaten amarket panic, all of which would make the Federal ReserveSystem's problem of correcting a badly disordered marketcondition most difficult. Moreover, to delay action insupporting the U. S. Government securities market willstand to aggravate the difficulty of handling the sub-stantial volume of reserves that would presumably haveto be injected into the commercial banking system at somefuture date when System action to support the market couldno longer be put off.As a practical matter, the Federal Reserve System'sproblems have already been complicated by the fact thatso many commercial banks have extended the maturities oftheir investments in U. S. Government securities and maynow be frozen into such positions by the market deprecia-tion in their holdings, which depreciation would growfurther as long as the prices of U. S. Government securi-ties should continue to fall. The financing problems ofthe United States Treasury are involved in this situationin that to the extent that commercial banks have becomefrozen into their investment positions in U. S. Governmentsecurities, their power to free themselves from suchinvestments in order to engage either as underwriters orinvestors in new issues of U. S. Government securities iscorrespondingly eliminated, except as the Federal ReserveSystem should follow the economically undesirable andinflationary alternative of constantly supplying the com-mercial banking system with new reserves in order tosupport their participation in U. S. Treasury financingoperations.Everything considered, Federal Reserve System actionto vigorously support the U. S. Government securitiesmarket is called for at this time.-27- 7/29/58 -28-Mr. Vardaman said that he agreed with Mr. Bryan in hisexcellent photographic exposure of the situation with referenceto the paramount need for restoration of confidence, and assurancethat the System will not become an operational aid to inflationarypressures.He also agreed with Mr. Bryan's analysis of the effects ofour recent operations in the Open Market Account; and he believedstrongly that the Federal Open Market Committee should allow thepattern of interest rates to reach, in as orderly manner as possible,a logical level, in view of the economic recovery apparent, and inview of the international situation.Mr. Vardaman said, in passing, that he would like to expresshis opinion that telephone meetings were generally unsatisfactory,and even dangerous, and should be avoided except under real emergencyconditions, and stated that he did not think that a temporarily dis-orderly market would ordinarily be a sufficient cause for such ameeting. He pointed out that, in his opinion, these telephone con-ferences had a potentially panic aspect which was not fair to theparticipants, since the participants were denied the advantage ofmeeting face to face with their other members and allowing a fulldiscussion of the grave problems. In substance, he felt that anyproblem which was serious enough to warrant a telephone meetingmade it all the more important that the situation should be dealtwith by a personal gathering of the members of the Committee. 7/29/58 -29-As to the directive, Mr. Vardaman stated that he felt thewords "further" and "ease" should be eliminated, and suggested thata proper wording might be something like "to contributing by appro-priate monetary policy to sustainable growth of the economy." Hewould not make any reference in the directive to orderly marketconditions or to absorbing redundant reserves.Mr. Leach said that favorable economic signs were widespreadin the Fifth District. The cotton textile industry had ad encourag-ing market developments in recent weeks which portended a bettersecond half, bituminous coal was facing an improved demand situation,and cigarette production continued to do well. In fact, manufacturingman-hours figures for June showed gains in virtually every line, asdid employment in nonmanufacturing industries. Despite smaller acre-ages, the outlook for 1958 farm production was considerably improvedover 1957's record. Department store sales for July were now esti-mated at 5 per cent above June for the best monthly total this year,due partly, but not entirely, to increased trade in the District ofColumbia following the Federal pay increase. The supply of fundsfor residential mortgage loans continued sufficient to exert down-ward pressure on rates. The most common rate on conventional loansappeared to be 5-1/2 per cent but some of the Reserve Bank's con-tacts reported rates as low as 4-3/4 per cent on prime loans.Mr. Leach said, with respect to policy, that he was worried,as he had been at the July 8 meeting, about further increases in the 7/29/58 -30-liquidity of the banking system and the economy if the System con-tinued net free reserves at the $500-$600 million level. Moreover,there was stronger evidence now than three weeks ago that there hadbeen a definite change in economic conditions and prospects sincethe current directive was adopted on March 4. In early March theeconomy was in a rapid decline which had persisted for several months,with no reversal in sight. Accordingly, a policy that was appropriatethen seemed clearly inappropriate now, when economic developments wereincreasingly favorable. He would not like the record to indicate thatthe Committee had seen no change in economic conditions between March 4and the present time.Mr. Leach went on to say that in his judgment the System hadalready supplied ample liquidity. The financial stage had been setfor economic recovery and in his opinion recovery was under way.Providing redundant liquidity would be highly dangerous because itwould aggravate inflationary pressures in the future, and he wouldtherefore favor a shift to less ease. Admittedly, such a changewould be difficult to implement in the immediate future because ofcurrent Treasury financing and the large payment that would be madeon August 1 for the new certificates that the System Account pur-chased last week. However, it now appeared that there would bequite an interlude before the next Treasury financing and he con-sidered it imperative to move toward less ease as soon as practicable. 7/29/58 -31-This implied net free reserves below the $500-$600 million levelthat had been maintained up until now, and it made a change in thedirective highly desirable. In considering such a change the Com-mittee might want to look at the outstanding directive and see whatabout that directive it did not like. For example, it now appearedthat resumption of economic growth started in April or May. Also,consideration might be given to whether the word "ease" should becontinued in the directive; personally, he thought that it shouldbe continued because the upturn was still very small and there wasstill a long way to go before achieving complete recovery. One wayin which clause (b) of the directive might be worded to reflect achange in emphasis toward less ease would be the following: "tocontributing by monetary ease to recovery of the economy withoutcreating redundant liquidity." In making these comments, he wasassuming that the System would endeavor to recapture as soon aspossible the reserves that would become available on August 1.Mr. Leedy stated that the economic situation seemed toprovide clear evidence of the direction in which policy should bemoving but that other elements in the picture today tended to obscurethe economic considerations. In particular, he referred to theinflationary psychology that was rampant, fed in part by the situa-tion in the Middle East, and to the Treasury's needs for the balanceof this year. To him, it was difficult to reconcile support of the 7/29/58 -32-Government securities market with the System's responsibility toprovide only the requirements of the economy as far as the moneysupply is concerned. It seemed to him that the Committee wouldhave to face up to that problem and make a very positive decision.He was not going to make any judgments from hindsight as to whathad been done recently, but it seemed to him that from this pointforward, with the Treasury having announced that it would be outof the market until October, the System should move as quickly asit could to get back into the position that prevailed before therecent open market operations took place. In saying this, herecognized that there might be great difficulty due to the un-certainties in the market, but he had the feeling that continuedparticipation by the System in the market by way of support opera-tions might have an effect opposite to that intended. In otherwords, the System might actually be contributing to inflationarypsychology.Mr. Leedy expressed the view that the policy directive mustbe changed if it was going to reflect accurately what was intendedbetween now and the Committee meeting on August 19. The operationthat he had in mind would mean orderly absorption of some of theredundant reserves to the extent possible. In these circumstanceshe had drafted as a possibility for clause (b) the following: "witha view to the orderly absorption of reserve funds in excess of those 7/29/58 -33-required to provide monetary ease for the resumption or promotionof stable growth of the economy." He expressed the view that assoon as possible, consistent with the market situation, an announce-ment should be made to the effect that the directive authorizing theManager of the Account to operate in all sectors of the market hadbeen withdrawn. Such a statement, of course, would have to becarefully worded. It should point out that Committee policy con-tinued to be one of operating in other than short-term securitiesif necessary for the correction of a disorderly market. It seemedto him that the very fact that public notice had originally beengiven might cause some uncertainty in the market and that in fair-ness to those dealing in the market word should be given that thedirective announced on July 18 was no longer in effect.Perhaps, Mr. Leedy said, the time was approaching when thereshould be less ease than there had been. For the next three weeks,however, if it were possible to cut back to the point before therecent open market operations took place, he felt that that wouldbe doing extremely well. Afterward, it might be appropriate to takea look to see whether a lesser degree of ease should be the policy.Mr. Allen reported that a survey of Seventh District business-men and bankers indicated that the situation in the Middle East had asyet had little, if any, effect on business plans or conditions. Thereseemed to be agreement, he said, that inventory liquidation should end 7/29/58 -34-soon, because it had proceeded for so long without a correspondingdrop in gross national product and because the Middle East situa-tion and the prospects for further inflation would bring about atleast a review of inventory situations, and possibly actions. Localproducers of steel and copper products reported that the pickup inorders which was reported in May and June was continuing. A priceboost for steel of $5 or $6 per ton was still generally expected,probably in August. Opinions expressed at a meeting of Chicago areahousing economists on July 23 confirmed improvement in that sector.New mortgage lending by savings and loan associations was runningwell below 1957 earlier in the year but was now somewhat higher.Employment trends appeared to be moderately upward in all Statesin the district except Michigan, although it was doubtful that anyState other than Iowa was witnessing better performance than thenation. One encouraging sign was the call back of 1,000 workersby Caterpillar. Sales of road-building machinery had begun toimprove several months ago but inventories were so heavy that therehad been no need to increase production.Mr. Allen said that a number of local firms had told theReserve Bank that they were enjoying a substantial improvement inoutput per worker. Employees seemed to be putting forth a greatereffort, personnel managers had been able to be more selective onnew hirings, and absenteeism had been reduced very sharply. For 7/29/58 -35-some firms the increase in output per worker, both white collar andblue, appeared to be in the order of 4 or 5 per cent over the pastsix months to a year. All of this suggested that unemployment mightremain fairly high even if over-all activity improved significantlyfrom now to the end of the year. In Detroit, for instance, whereunemployment was expected to run between 315,000 and 335,000 in lateAugust as a result of the model changeover shutdowns, unemploymentof 200,000 was expected even after the new models were in production.The Michigan Employment Commission stated that eight years' senioritywould be the minimum requirement when rehiring began, and out-migration of low seniority workers would doubtless occur.Mr. Allen went on to say that, as he had reported at recentmeetings, the agricultural areas of the district were for the mostpart in good shape. Crop conditions continued favorable across thecorn belt. Allis-Chalmers and International Harvester reported thatsales of farm machinery and equipment were above 1957 frr the firsthalf of the year.Continuing, Mr. Allen said that business loans at the district'sreporting member banks had continued to decline, as had been the casein the nation. Because there was so little use of the Reserve Bank'sdiscount window, he was not as fully informed as he would otherwisebe regarding the investment portfolio situations in member banks,but he did know that two of the largest banks overinvested--speculatedwas the word--in the 2-5/8 per cent issue. 7/29/58 -36-As to open market policy, Mr. Allen said he was sad and un-happy about what had happened in the last few weeks. Because itbore out what someone had said this morning, he wished to read hiscomments at a telephone meeting on April 24, 1957, when the Treasurywas urging the System to enter the market to support what it fearedwould be an unsuccessful financing operation. Mr. Allen then readthe following comments:The Treasury in its past financing has taken politicalaction with bad economic results.Characteristically, as happens in every country, theywant the Central Bank to bail them out. They don't want ordare to admit their mistakes--for political reasons.If we bail them out it is at the expense of thecountry--which is not the right thing to do--and furthermore,it is the way to our own ruin. Once we assist by bailingout--then we are responsible--and we should confine ourresponsibility to our own field--in this and any other ad-ministration.The Treasury--and Burgess in particular--are control-minded--we should not be--we should be market-minded. IfBurgess were in our shoes he would help the Treasury becausehe is control-minded. We must keep ourselves and the Desk--market and not control-minded.Mr. Allen said it might be argued that those comments did notapply to the same extent at present. However, he thought that they ap-plied in large measure. Even at that time, he recalled, the internationalsituation was advanced by the Treasury as an argument.It was obvious, Mr. Allen said, that he hoped the Committeewould "get back on the wagon and take the pledge again." LastThursday the Committee apparently did decide to go back on the wagonand he hoped that the public would be advised as soon as possible. 7/29/58 -37-Mr. Allen said it seemed obvious that the directive should bechanged. Of the suggestions that had been made, the wording pro-posed by Chairman Martin would suit him best at this time.Mr. Deming stated that the economic picture in the NinthDistrict, based on a review yesterday, tended to support the feelingexpressed at this meeting that an economic upturn had occurred inthe country. Within the district, however, there was weakness inthe mining areas of Minnesota, Wisconsin, and Michigan, and theReserve Bank had taken a hard look at the mining sections through fieldinvestigation. There were now about 25,000 people unemployed in thoseareas, 2-1/2 times the number unemployed last year, and it appearedthat this situation would continue through the balance of the year.So far this year, Lake Superior ore shipments were down 60 per centfrom a year ago. Copper was off only 6 per cent but 1957 was 6 percent below 1956. While the tourist business was good, it was not asgood as had been hoped for and it was not enough to offset all ofthe adverse factors. People were running out of regular unemploy-ment compensation benefits and, although all three of the Stateshad passed legislation to utilize Federal loan funds to extendpayments, those payments also would run out before the miningregions were restored. That was the major area of weakness inthe district, and otherwise everything was quite good. 7/29/58 -38-Mr. Deming said that, having been on vacation for threeweeks, he had formed his impressions of open market developmentsfrom reading about what had transpired. He shared some but notall of the concern expressed about the return to inflationarypsychology. While he was sorry that the System had had to gointo the market last week, it was an action taken in the lightof the circumstances. Now, however, the System should get backas quickly as possible to a lower and more realistic level offree reserves although, in view of the present state of the market,he would not favor operating on the selling side except in theshortest securities.Mr. Deming said he was not sure that the System had con-tributed so completely as had been suggested to an excessive liquidityposition of the banking system. Statistics compiled recently in theNinth District showed that the country banks had gone very stronglyinto long-term securities to meet earnings problems, and to a morelimited extent the same thing also was true of the city banks.Therefore, with the change in the interest rate structure the bankswere not in quite as liquid a position as might have been thought,and the presumed upward adjustment in rates would act as somethingof a brake.Mr. Deming felt that it would be a serious mistake to takeany dramatic action at this time to underline the point that the 7/29/58 -39-System feared inflation. The System's record, he thought, wasquite good. He would not favor a discount rate change at thistime for he believed that the hazards of an upward adjustmentwould far outweigh the gains. If it were decided to make a changein the policy directive, he would want the directive to reflectthe economic change that the Committee saw in process as well asthe unique temporary intervention in the market. He would suggest"to contributing to the continuance of economic growth while ab-sorbing redundant reserves."Mr. Mangels stated that further economic improvement wasevident on the West Coast as in other parts of the country, althoughthe degree of improvement was rather moderate. Business firms seemedto have resumed buying to restore inventories for current needs butthere was no evidence of undue and unnecessary inventory accumulation.In the course of a recent informal survey it was indicated that thiswould not be worthwhile for business for in the event of a nationalemergency prior precautionary inventory increases would be takeninto consideration in subsequent allocation of materials. Therefore,they were just continuing to take care of items in short supply.There was some evidence, Mr. Mangels said, of a little more strengthin defense supporting expenditures. Increases were noted in employ-ment at Government ordnance plants, and the airplane factories weremaintaining steady employment. While retail sales were holding up 7/29/58 -40-well, there were indications that July might be somewhat lower thanJune. Housing starts had improved materially; the Federal HousingAdministration had advised the Reserve Bank that requests for in-spections and appraisals in the second quarter were double thosein the second quarter of 1957. Also, there was some demand fortwenty-five year, 10 per cent down-payment mortgages. Auto salesin June were down somewhat from May but this probably reflected aseasonal pattern. Industrial plant construction had not shown agreat deal of improvement, either in terms of actual constructionor planning, but in the second quarter heavy engineering contractawards exceeded the same period in 1957 by 11 per cent. Althoughemployment was up 1/2 per cent in June, there had not been anymoderation in unemployment totals. Insured unemployment droppedless than seasonally in June and it appeared that unemployment forJuly would be slightly above the national average, due primarilyto material increase in the labor supply on the West Coast. InOregon and Washington the new unemployment compensation year startedJuly 1, which would result in quite a rise in claims because un-employed persons who had exhausted their benefits would be reinstated.Mr. Mangels said that, although real estate loans were up $17million and agricultural loans were up $14 million, total bank loansfor the three weeks which ended July 16 were down $47 million, mostof the decline having been in loans to Government securities dealers. 7/29/58 -41-The rather substantial increase of $355 million in demand depositswas four times the increase last year, and for the three-week periodthe increase was almost as large as for all banks in the UnitedStates. Time deposits continued to increase. Bank borrowings werevirtually nil and Federal funds sales exceeded purchases slightlyin moderate volume.Turning to the national picture, Mr. Mangels said that therewere rather clear signs of a bottoming-out of the recession. Therewere some signs that a pickup was being generated, but no conclusiveevidence that this pickup would be permanent. Instead, it might beon a somewhat temporary basis. With regard to the internationalsituation and its effect on Federal Government expenditures, Mr.Mangels said that unless the Government expanded its position inthe Middle East or was drawn into other ventures, there might notbe any great increase in Federal expenditures. Nevertheless, therewould be a heavy calendar of Government financing and refinancingfor the remainder of this year, and it would probably be necessaryto supply additional bank reserves in the next few months. Thereprobably would be considerable churning in the market because ofthe large number of holders with large amounts of securities whodid not exchange and allowed the maturities to mature. The newTreasury cash offering might absorb some of those funds.Mr. Mangels felt that a change in the policy directivealong the lines suggested by Chairman Martin would be quite 7/29/58 -42-appropriate for the next three-week period. Because the presentvolume of free reserves was above the range of the normal thinkingof the Committee, the objective should be try to get back to a morenormal basis--somewhere around $500 million or perhaps a littleless. Mr. Mangels went on to say that he saw no reason to changethe discount rate at the present time. He felt that it probablywould be in order to make some announcement of the Committee'sreturn to a "bills only" policy but that it might be advisable towait a little while until the situation settled. Then, it mightbe announced that as of a particular date the special authoritywas terminated and the System had not intervened in the marketsince that time.Mr. Irons stated that he would not dwell on the specificsof the economic situation in the Eleventh District. In generalterms, however, recent economic developments both in the nationand the district convinced him that the worst of the recessionhad been seen and that the country was moving into a period ofrecovery. In the circumstances, System policy should now berelated to the rate of economic recovery,and the degree of potentialinflation apparent in that development, rather than to the recessionand various problems that might arise out of it. In view of hisappraisal of the economic situation and because of his feeling thatSystem action should be governed by the economic pattern and notpredominantly by the Treasury's problems, he felt that the Committee 7/29/58 -43-should move away from ease. Accordingly, he would like to see thewords "contribute further through monetary ease" taken out of thedirective. While he would not want to shift to a policy of realrestraint, he would move away from ease and, feeling that a changein policy of that sort would be beneficial, he would not be dis-turbed if the market recognized it. Some of the trouble in theGovernment securities market, he said, had been the result of badappraisals on the part of the market, and he would not be concernedabout taking action that could be regarded as an indication of achange in policy. To recapture or absorb a large part of the re-serves that had been put into the market, he would take advantageof every runoff possibility. He would favor selling bills when-ever possible and he would not be opposed to selling other shortissues if the Account was "out of merchandise in bills." Theproblem that the System must face arose out of the economic situa-tion on the one hand and the Treasury's deficit financing problemson the other hand. If the System followed the economic approach inits policy, it seemed almost inevitable that there would be risinginterest rates, while the danger of the other course was inflation.As for himself, the choice would be one of not preventing a risein interest rates rather than to continue monetizing the publicdebt and permit inflation. In line with his appraisal of policyand appropriate System action, he would expect to see rising short-term rates in the market, and he would like to see the present 7/29/58 -44-discount rate level become more realistic in relation to such rates.While he would not favor a change in the discount rate at the moment,possibly that might be appropriate in a comparatively short period,especially if some of the present degree of ease were removed so asto permit market rates to move up. He favored proceeding throughopen market operations to absorb this ease and reach toward lessartificial conditions in the market.Mr. Irons also said that he would favor a change in marginrequirements for there had been a considerable increase in the amountof credit outstanding in the stock market. There were inflationaryundercurrents in the market and he questioned whether the Boardshould permit them to be supported by additional injections of credit.It was his estimate that between January and the present time theamount of credit in the market had increased about 20 per cent.Mr. Irons felt that the directive should be changed now.As previously indicated, he would like to take out not only theword "further" but also "monetary ease." He concurred in the sug-gestion of Chairman Martin, but he would not favor the suggestionof the Secretary because it would tie the Committee too specificallyto correcting a particular development. Another possibility would be"to foster sustainable economic recovery and growth in the economyby providing reserves consistent with economic requirements andorderly market conditions." Mr. Irons commented that one could not 7/29/58 -45-discard from consideration the matter of orderly market conditions.There is a difference, he noted, between operations to correct dis-order in the market, when it appears, and operations to support aTreasury offering. The concept of orderly market conditions appearedto belong in the directive, and he questioned restricting the directiveto absorbing redundant reserves.Mr. Erickson stated that a review of conditions in the FirstDistrict following his return from vacation indicated that the worstof the recession had probably ended. The New England manufacturingindex went up in May for the first time in seven months and went upagain in June. Employment likewise was up in May and again in June,with 48,000 more workers employed in June. Also, for the first timein several months manufacturing employment exceeded the previousmonth. May of last year was an all-time peak in construction, andMay of this year was also a good month. While department store salesin June were disappointing, first and second week figures in July wereappreciably better, probably due to the fact that Boston stores wereopen on Saturdays for the first time in a number of years and weatherconditions were conducive to shopping. In June, as in May, theMassachusetts retail price index declined, the vacation businessappeared not to be meeting expectations, and the Reserve Bank'ssurvey of mutual savings banks showed that deposit growth continuedat a higher rate than last year. In July, to date, the ReserveBank's discount window had been used less on a daily average than 7/29/58 -46-in any other month since January 1952.Turning to policy, Mr. Erickson said that he did not favorany change in the discount rate but believed that the directiveshould be changed. Of all the suggestions made thus far, hepreferred the suggestion of Chairman Martin. As rapidly as pos-sible, the Account Management should work toward getting the levelof free reserves down to the $400 million level. He would sellbills first, but if the objective could not be accomplished withbills he would use other short-term securities. Mr. Erickson hopedthat the bill rate would move up, and also the Federal funds rate.With reference to System operations during the last tendays, Mr. Erickson noted that continuing Committee policy callsfor the System to go into the market in the event of a disorderlysituation. While he was surprised that the operations had to beso massive, that may have been necessary. He would not favor anannouncement of the termination of the special authority givento the Manager of the Account since under present conditions theremight still be a disorderly market. Therefore, he would not makeany announcement until the market was clearly out of that situation.He would favor allowing interest rates to seek their true level,but in the event of a clearly disorderly condition the System wouldhave to go into the market.Mr. Balderston stated that although he would subscribe tothe wording for clause (b) of the policy directive which had been 7/29/58 -47-suggested by Mr. Irons, his own point of view would be emphasizedby the phrase "to absorbing redundant reserves and eliminating freereserves as rapidly as possible without creating a disorderly market."The System having taken unusual and emergency action last week, hebelieved that the directive should be pointed toward escaping fromthe situation that had resulted. In his view, Mr. Balderston said,reserves had in fact been redundant since early June. While therecession might not have bottomed out permanently, the declinecertainly had ceased for the moment and business psychology hadagain turned ebullient. He went on to say that the excess of bankreserves that he thought was present even before the Lebanon incidentmight have stemmed from adhering too long to a fixed level of freereserves and perhaps the Committee had been deceived by the appearanceof market tightness, especially in New York City, caused by heavybank securities investments. To put it another way, the Committeemight have tended to watch the depth of the water in the irrigationditch rather than the use of the water in the fields being cultivated.Mr. Balderston said he believed in the use of the free reservefigure as the best language available for indicating a target or goal.However, adherence to a $500 or $600 million level of free reservesweek after week pressed reserves into the banking system in suchfashion as in his judgment to make the banking system unduly liquid.Accordingly, the Committee now found itself unpleasantly surprised 7/29/58 -48-by having that credit used in places where it was not constructive,such as in the stock market at the present time. The emergencyaction of last week therefore accentuated a problem which wasalready serious from the economic point of view, because the creditthat the System had supplied was tending to be misused. The question,then, was what to do about so serious a situation. Mr. Balderstonbelieved that sufficient bills and other short-term issues should besold to more than reverse the recent emergency action. Rather thanreturn to free reserves of $500 million, he was thinking of theelimination of free reserves as steadily, consistently, and rapidlyas possible right up to the point of disorderliness in the marketbecause he felt that the price of bonds would have to drop four orfive points. If free reserves were eliminated--and he hoped thatcould be accomplished prior to Labor Day--he would favor raisingthe discount rate 1/4 of a percentage point, and then 1/2 of apercentage point, in order not to repeat the "pitty pat" policyfollowed in 1956. With regard to the question of publicizing thereturn to a "bills only" policy, he said that he would favor noannouncement. Rather, he would merely stay out of the market.Chairman Martin began his remarks by commenting that itwould not be possible to "change the world" between now andAugust 19, the date of the next scheduled meeting of the FederalOpen Market Committee. In view of the statements that had been 7/29/58 -49-made around the table, he thought that he should say somethingby way of observation on the matter of principle and the Treasury.It was terribly important, he said, for all to realize that theCommittee was dealing with the most difficult problem in politicalscience in the whole world. In order to maintain perspective itmust also be realized that the Federal Reserve System, like others,can occasionally make mistakes; one should not blame the otherfellow all of the time and sit in a vacuum. Furthermore, it isnecessary to look at one's own mistakes before looking at themistakes of others. As persuasive as were Mr. Bryan's commentsabout loss of confidence, it was not too long ago, he recalled,that Mr. Bryan was advocating a reduction in reserve requirementsas essential to the promotion of economic recovery. The Chairman,too, had been in error a great deal, and no one can claim to becorrect 100 per cent of the time. This pointed up the need forflexibility and, as he had remarked on other occasions, "steelwhich bends is much stronger than iron which breaks." On severaloccasions he felt that the System had let itself get into theposition of the iron that breaks.Chairman Martin said that he also felt that he must saya word on behalf of the Treasury, for the Treasury and the FederalReserve are working toward a common objective. It might be that 7/29/58 -50-both of them could be completely right but that neither wouldattain the objective. At present there was a very fortunatesituation at the Treasury because both Secretary Anderson andUnder Secretary Baird were just as anxious as anyone to correctthe current situation. Of this, there was no question at all inhis mind. They were dealing with a very difficult problem thatthe System had compounded for them, for if the System had notbeen as intent on following an easy money policy there could nothave been the speculative fever that developed and finallyculminated in the speculation in the 2-5/8 per cent bonds. TheTreasury probably had made some technical errors, but those errorswere easy to make when the Treasury had to consider that the FederalReserve was following a policy of further ease.The Chairman then commented on the extent to which he be-lieved in maintaining operating procedures or principles. On theother hand, he said, the Committee should not throw up its handsthe first time circumstances developed which made the Committeerealize that some flexibility was required. He recalled, andsaid he was delighted by the fact, that the special authoritygiven at the second afternoon meeting on July 18 was granted byunanimous vote of the Committee. He went on to say that the cryof "wolf" always looks bad in retrospect. However, at the time 7/29/58 -51-the action was taken no one knew what would happen over the weekend which preceded the Treasury financing. It might have beenperfectly right to say "just step aside and the market may notcollapse," but if fighting had actually occurred in the MiddleEast the Committee probably would now be glad that it took actionin the way that it did. Also, regardless of theories, when certainthings are involved the public will not sit by and let the situationgo unheeded. He might be in error in that opinion, but it wascertainly something that the Committee must bear in mind at alltimes. The market, he said, is a free market but one in which theFederal Reserve System does participate. Many times he had expressedhis own dissatisfaction with that participation, and work must bedone continually on the System's relationships with the market.However, unless a situation should develop where the Treasury isdeliberately forcing the System and the System knows that theTreasury is wrong, it will be necessary to proceed on a "give andtake basis."Chairman Martin reiterated that both Mr. Anderson and Mr.Baird were just as anxious as the Federal Reserve to correct thecurrent situation in the most effective way. He also repeatedthat he believed the Federal Reserve had a real share in the problemthat the Treasury faced with the 2-5/8 per cent bonds, because thepolicy of easy money that it pursued permitted speculation to theextent that had occurred. 7/29/58 -52-Continuing, Chairman Martin said that it was well to havedifferent views within the System. He was glad that Mr. Mills hadpresented a statement on behalf of the position that the Systemshould support the Government securities market even though he didnot agree with that point of view. The Chairman went on to saythat he rather got the impression from the comments around thetable that perhaps the System was taking itself a little tooseriously, and perhaps he was falling into the same error. However,he again pointed out that the Committee was now addressing itselfto a three-week period. At the moment it seemed fairly clear that,without risking a market collapse, the Committee probably could notdo a whole lot to mop up excess reserves in that period of time.Assuming the success of the Treasury's offering today, on August 19the Committee would have a clear field for whatever it wanted todo with respect to monetary policy. The System, he felt, had anobligation to pick up all of the reserves that it could, and hethought it was clear that the majority of the Committee wanted todo that in order to reestablish a position which had been completelydistorted by the events of the last two weeks. However, the elementof confidence described by Mr. Bryan was involved in what could bedone during this period. Personally, he would not want to give upthe fight against inflation or assume that the recovery now develop-ing should make the Federal Reserve throw up its hands. What the 7/29/58 -53-Committee was faced with over the next three weeks was to try torecover as far as possible its position and poise, and in conversa-tions with those outside the System not give way to defeatism. Theview that must be presented to the public was that the System wasnot licked but would continue the fight. Also, the Committee mustdo everything possible to aid the Manager of the Account in a periodlike this. Naturally, members of the Committee might disagree withsome of the things that he did, but the Manager was under pressure.It must be borne in mind, the Chairman said, that the struggle inwhich the System was now engaged is a never-ending one. In hisopinion, the System had made remarkable progress within the limita-tions of its powers. For example, there was a large Federal budgetand if the System had not moved in the way that it did there mightwell have been a substantial tax cut in addition to the largerbudget.The Chairman said he did not think that the System had lostany of its basic principles in the recent operations. The realbattle with inflation probably was coming in the 1960s, so it wasimportant for each person to try to keep his feet on the ground.When mistakes were made, one should not just say that it was amistake but try to see what the benefits and failures were andthen move forward. 7/29/58Today, Chairman Martin said, the Committee seemed to bein agreement to a surprising extent. The question was principallythe wording of the policy directive, and there could be a lot ofviews on that question. When he considered it in the light of thethree-week period ahead, he was inclined to think that perhaps Mr.Riefler had a point. At this time it was difficult to appraisethe situation and spell out a directive in precise terms, andlanguage that would achieve the Committee's short-run purposetherefore would seem desirable. Then, at the meeting on August 19,the Committee could spell out a more effective directive, perhapsalong the lines mentioned by Mr. Deming, Mr. Irons, or others.There were expressions of agreement around the table withChairman Martin's suggestion.Mr. Hayes stated that, although he had always questionedwhether the directive should get into detail rather than basicpolicy changes, there was no question in his mind about the re-capturing of redundant reserves. He said that he was a littleconcerned, however, that if the redundant reserves were recapturedwithin the ensuing three-week period the Management of the Accountwould, in effect, be left without any directive.Comments on this point stressed the unlikelihood that theredundant reserves could be absorbed in the next three weeks. Mr.Rouse observed that if they were recaptured before the August 19 meeting it would be possible to call a meeting of the Committeeby telephone and consider the need for a new directive.Thereupon, upon motion duly madeand seconded, the Committee votedunanimously to direct the Federal Re-serve Bank of New York, until otherwisedirected by the Committee:(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges(including replacement of maturing securities, and allow-ing maturities to run off without replacement) for theSystem Open Market Account in the open market or, in thecase of maturing securities, by direct exchange with theTreasury, as may be necessary in the light of current andprospective economic conditions and the general creditsituation of the country, with a view (a) to relating thesupply of funds in the market to the needs of commerce andbusiness, (b) to recapturing redundant reserves, and (c) tothe practical administration of the Account; provided thatthe aggregate amount of securities held in the System Ac-count (including commitments for the purchase or sale ofsecurities for the Account) at the close of this date,other than special short-term certificates of indebtednesspurchased from time to time for the temporary accommodationof the Treasury, shall not be increased or decreased bymore than $1 billion;(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for theaccount of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (withdiscretion, in cases where it seems desirable, to issueparticipations to one or more Federal Reserve Banks) suchamounts of special short-term certificates of indebtednessas may be necessary from time to time for the temporaryaccommodation of the Treasury; provided that the totalamount of such certificates held at any one time by theFederal Reserve Banks shall not exceed in the aggregate$500 million.At the last meeting* of the Committee consideration was givento a suggestion for increasing from $50 million to $75 million thelimitation on outright holdings of bankers' acceptances by the* Refers to meeting on July 8, 1958.7/29/58-55- 7/29/58 -56-Federal Reserve Bank of New York. However, in view of differingopinions which were expressed, a decision on the matter was deferred.Subsequently, under date of July 25, 1958, there were distributed tothe members of the Committee copies of a memorandum from Mr. Rousediscussing, on the basis of the minutes of the Federal Open MarketCommittee and its executive committee, the apparent objectives ofthe authorized acceptance operations. The memorandum suggestedthat the authorizations of the Committee appeared to contemplatecoordinating acceptance operations with Government securitiesoperations and that such coordination was not contrary to theSystem's objective of fostering interest in the acceptance marketmerely because, on certain occasions, the New York Bank had beenprevented from filling orders received from foreign central bankcorrespondents.In supplementation of Mr. Rouse's memorandum, Mr. Hayesmade the following comments:1. The record seems to me pretty clear that theCommittee, besides undertaking to encourage the develop-ment of the acceptance market, has adopted a policy ofmaking our acceptance transactions consistent with ourgeneral credit policies.2. Although the size of these transactions isadmittedly minute by comparison with our Governmentsecurity operations, acceptances do have characteristicswhich make them a convenient money market instrument foreffecting open market operations. 7/29/583. The New York Bank has felt that consistency withGovernment security operations would be accomplished mosteffectively if week-to-week changes in acceptance holdingswere always in the same direction as changes in Governmentsecurity holdings. Perhaps this concept has been a littletoo rigid.4. Our principal interest being to develop a largerand more active acceptance market, it is logical that ouraim should be mainly in the direction of a greater domesticinterest in the market, in which foreign buying already playsa disproportionately active role. We believe that the veryfact of the Federal Reserve Bank's being consistently inthe market is one of the best means of stimulating thisdomestic interest.5. At the same time, our interest in providing a well-rounded service to the foreign central banks justifies ourmaking considerable efforts to satisfy those banks' needs,provided that in so doing we are not being inconsistent withour general credit policies. I think there is room hereperhaps for a somewhat more flexible approach to the matterof week-to-week changes in holdings. That is, I would seeno harm in our reducing our acceptance holdings by a modestamount for a week while we were adding to Governmentsecurity holdings, or vice versa--provided we were showinga consistent interest in the acceptance market by havingat all times a substantial and reasonably stable portfolio.6. Since we are entering a season when acceptancefinancing is expected to expand, and in view of the upwardtrend in outstanding acceptances over a period of years,and with our present holdings uncomfortably close to the$50 million limit, it would seem highly desirable to raisethat limit to $75 million.Mr. Robertson stated that he had prepared a paper on the sub-ject before receiving Mr. Rouse's memorandum. However, after readingthe memorandum he would not want to change his own paper at all. Hethen read the following statement:I am going to outline briefly the development ofFederal Reserve System participation in the bank ac-ceptance market over the past four years. This littlehistory, of which the proposal now before us is thelatest episode, demonstrates how necessary it is for 7/29/58this Committee to be ever vigilant, in order to avoidfinding itself in a position it never intended to assume.Early in 1954 it was suggested that we take theinitiative in purchasing some $20 or $30 million of ac-ceptances in order to "free demand generally from ad-ministered rate constriction and to make market ratesresponsive to changes in the demand for and supply ofacceptances." I discussed this proposal in my memorandumof June 1, 1954, in which I expressed doubts and presentedfour questions that I felt should be clarified before theCommittee acted on the proposal.The proponents of the proposal did not attempt toanswer the questions presented in my memorandum, but theproposal nevertheless was reactivated some months later.In March 1955 the subject was again presented to theCommittee, although the original objective--to "freedemand generally from administered rate constriction"--was no longer presented as a basis for action. TheCommittee authorized System purchases of bank acceptancesin an amount not to exceed $25 million; the Chairmanstated that the System "should avoid any 'finagling' inthe market but should participate in a very modest wayin order to show the interest of the central bankingorganization." This limited objective made our actionrelatively innocuous, in my opinion, although I feltthat the acceptance market would receive more convincingassurance of Federal Reserve interest if we resumed the"back-stopping" procedure that worked quite well in the1920's.In view of the fact that the System intended, ineffect, simply to maintain a token portfolio of bankacceptances to show its interest in that market, theCommittee expressly provided that transactions in bankacceptances "would be entered into only when consistentwith the general credit policies of the Federal OpenMarket Committee." In other words, our general creditpolicies necessarily were to be paramount, and theCommittee's subordinate objective of showing interestin the bank acceptance market would not justify pur-chases or sales of acceptances in circumstances wheresuch action would be inconsistent with current creditpolicies.At the Committee's March 1955 meeting, approval ofthe actual form of the resolution on this subject was 7/29/58delegated to the executive committee. The resolution ap-proved by the executive committee did not provide thatacceptance transactions should be entered into "only whenconsistent with the general credit policies," but providedinstead that such transactions were authorized,"at such times and in such amounts as the executivecommittee may deem advisable and consistent withthe general credit policies."The change in emphasis may seem insignificant, but laterevents reveal that such a change in emphasis can be thefirst step in the unintentional development of a policyquite different from that originally intended.At our meeting in March 1956 we renewed the authoriza-tion to the New York Reserve Bank to hold up to $25 millionof acceptances. However, our published explanation was thatthe action was taken "on the grounds that the System shouldassist in the further development of an acceptance market inthe United States...." Literally this was not inconsistentwith the original purpose of "showing the interest of thecentral bank organization in this market," but the newlanguage hinted at a more aggressive participation.The attitude of the Trading Desk on this subject wasperhaps reflected in the following statement in a July 1956publication of the New York Reserve Bank on "Federal ReserveOperations in the Money and Government Securities Markets":"...expressing a general intention to vary the sizeof this holding [i.e., of bank acceptances] in a mannerthat would parallel other Federal Reserve action inthe money market (the available supply of acceptancespermitting), the Committee on March 29, 1955 authorizedthe Manager of the System Open Market Account to beginpurchases...."...the scale of operations in the acceptance markethas not reached magnitudes that could be consideredsignificant in supplementing operations undertaken inthe Government securities market to influence the moneymarket and general credit conditions." (page 88; un-derlining added)As far as I am aware, this Committee never expressed anintention that the holdings of bank acceptances should"parallel other Federal Reserve action in the money market,"but this idea apparently existed at the Trading Desk.At the November 27, 1956 meeting the maximum limit wasraised from $25 million to $50 million, and this increasedauthorization was renewed without change in March 1957.-59- 7/29/58The memorandum attached to Mr. Riefler's coveringmemorandum of July 7, 1958 recommends that the maximumlimit now be raised to $75 million. The camel's headand neck are now following his nose into the tent, buteven more important is the explanation of the proposal,which opens the way for the entire animal to move in--in fact, it hints that he is already in possession.The memorandum reveals that our acceptance holdingshave been increased recently in order "to be consistentwith increases in System holdings of United StatesGovernment securities." Referring to the existing $50million limit, the memorandum further states that"...if we were to continue to coordinate ac-ceptance activities with other market operations,our acceptance holdings could quickly reach thelimit."This language cannot reasonably be interpretedotherwise than as meaning that the Trading Desk regardsits transactions in bank acceptances as paralleling, asfar as possible, the operations in Government securities.This Committee never has authorized dealings in ac-ceptances as a supplementary means of effectuating ourgeneral credit policies--a sort of small-scale "me too"operation, along with Government securities transactions.If bank acceptance transactions have been entered intofor these purposes, such action goes beyond the scope ofthe existing authorization.To sum up, the Committee in 1955 decided to hold amodest portfolio of bank acceptances "as a means of showingthe interest of the central banking organization." By 1956the explanation of our operations was that "the Systemshould assist in the further development of an acceptancemarket." Later that year the maximum was increased to $50million. Now it is suggested that the ceiling be raisedto $75 million, but far more important is the first casualintimation that bank acceptance transactions should be used(and apparently already are being used) as one of ourmechanisms for implementing general credit policy.It is conceivable, although very unlikely in my opinion,that there are sound reasons for effectuating our creditpolicies through operations in acceptances as well as inGovernment securities. If this is so, however, the recom-mendation should be openly presented, and supported, onthat ground, so that the Committee will have an opportunity-60- 7/29/58 -61-to reach an informed judgment and to make a deliberatedecision on the matter. If the Committee were to takethe recommended action on the basis outlined in thememorandum referred to, it might later find that it hadbeen jockeyed into adopting bank acceptance operationsas a regular tool of general credit policy without everhaving realized that it was doing so.Mr. Hayes said that he was at a loss to understand what Mr.Robertson feared. If, in operating in acceptances, the New YorkBank happened to be paralleling open market operations, he couldnot see what harm was being done. It was clear to every member ofthe Committee that acceptance holdings were being changed week byweek and there was no thought, he said, of having any concealedobjective. He saw nothing irreconcilable between encouraging theacceptance market and using the bankers' acceptance as an instrumentof open market policy.Mr. Robertson said that he did not agree. The matter hadnever been put forward on the basis that the acceptance would beused as an additional open market instrument; instead, it had beenput forward in terms of showing an interest in the acceptance market.To go outside of that and use the acceptance as an open market toolwas in his opinion inconsistent with the position that the FederalOpen Market Committee had taken. He did not like the idea of takingan authorization given on one basis, gradually getting more andmore into the market, and finally taking control. 7/29/58 -62-Mr. Hayes replied that he disagreed with Mr. Robertson'sview of the importance of the New York Bank's share of the acceptancemarket. He pointed out that when the acceptance authority was firstgranted, $25 million was just as big a share of the market, pro-portionately, as $50 million is today, for the size of the markethas increased markedly. In response to a question, he observedthat acceptance holdings are also limited to 10 per cent of totalacceptances outstanding as shown by the most recent bankers'acceptance survey and that at present $75 million would represent5 per cent of total acceptances outstanding.After further discussion relating to the view of the NewYork Bank regarding the authorization if the total volume of bankers'acceptances should increase substantially further, Mr. Balderstonsaid that he had never heard a reasoned argument for participationin this area as a means of fostering foreign trade. He thought,however, that such an argument probably could be advanced. Therefore,before the Committee reached a final decision on the suggestion madeby the New York Bank, with which he had some sympathy, he would liketo have the staff advise the Committee what national advantage theycould see in using acceptances as an open market instrument. Mr.Robertson, he said, had performed a useful service in warning theCommittee not to proceed without knowing what it was doing, but 7/29/58 -63-he (Mr. Balderston) was concerned with the leadership of the UnitedStates in foreign trade and he would not wish to have a decisionmade by the Committee that would prevent participation in somethingthat might be to the national advantage.After Mr. Robertson said that he thought such a staff pre-sentation would be appropriate, Mr. Hayes said he had thought itwas a foregone conclusion that the acceptance market was one thatthe Committee wanted to encourage. He did not think that this wasa point at issue today, but he would have no objection to a studysuch as suggested.Chairman Martin commented that he thought the position hadbeen clear--at least it had always been his own position--that theCommittee wanted to do what it could to help the acceptance market.As he understood it, the differences of opinion related to how theSystem could be of most help, and there were two sides to thatquestion.In response to a question by Mr. Shepardson, Mr. Hayes saidthat, in general, it had been the approach of the New York Bank thatthe extent of its own activities did not make a large difference inthe amount of acceptances that foreign buyers were getting. Foreignbuyers were already so predominant in the picture on the demand sidethat from the standpoint of developing the acceptance market the NewYork Reserve Bank did not feel that it had to be so solicitous about 7/29/58 -64-them. Therefore, the Reserve Bank had not felt that it washurting the acceptance market if on occasion its own activitieswere the cause of foreign buyers not being able to obtain quiteas many acceptances as they desired.Mr. Allen noted that there are relatively few banks operatingin acceptance credits to any large extent. The New York banks, ofcourse, do what is to their best advantage; if they are loaned upotherwise and want to handle an operation by means of an acceptance,they will do it. If they wish to handle a transaction by means ofa clean note, they will do it that way. Mr. Allen said that fewpeople he talked with--people who regularly invest for a shortterm--had ever heard of acceptances. Therefore, he was rather in-clined to feel that being friendly to the acceptance market meantencouraging the dealers to get out and sell acceptances, with somesmall participation, if necessary, to take pressure off the dealer.Mr. Hayes said he rather liked the idea of actively con-sidering the merit of the acceptance as an instrument from theopen market standpoint. He went on to say that the New York Bankhad received some good comments in the past from the Board's staffregarding the usefulness of the acceptance as a money market in-strument. If the study previously suggested was to be made, perhapsthe Committee would also like to have an opinion on how good aninstrument the acceptance is for open market operations. 7/29/58 -65-After some discussion of the points that had been raisedby Messrs. Balderston and Hayes, Messrs. Thomas and Marget wererequested to submit a paper for the Committee's considerationrelevant to those points. At the same time it was agreed to tablefor further discussion the suggestion of the New York Reserve Bankfor an increase in the limitation on bankers' acceptance holdings.It was agreed that the next regular meeting of the Committeewould be held on Tuesday, August 19, 1958, at 10:00 a.m.Thereupon the meeting adjourned. A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the office of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington on Tuesday, July 29, 1958, at 2:45 p.m.PRESENT: Mr.  Mr.  Mr.  Mr.  Mr.  Mr.  Mr.  Mr.  Mr.  Mr.Martin, Chairman Hayes, Vice Chairman Balderston Fulton Irons Mills Robertson Shepardson Vardaman 1/ Deming, Alternate for Mr. MangelsMessrs. Allen and Treiber, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Messrs. Bopp, Bryan, and Leedy, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Atlanta and Kansas City, respectively Mr. Riefler, Secretary Mr. Thurston, Assistant Secretary Mr. Solomon, Assistant General Counsel Mr. Thomas, Economist Messrs. Hostetler, Walker, and Young, Associate Economists Mr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market Account Mr. Kenyon, Assistant Secretary, Board of Governors Mr. Keir, Acting Chief, Government Finance Section, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Mr. Stone, Manager, Securities Department, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Mr. Tow, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City; and Messrs. Anderson and Atkinson, Economic Advisers, Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and Atlanta, respectively1/ Entered the meeting at point indicated in minutes. 7/29/58 -2Mr. Rouse, at whose request this meeting had been called, noted that in his remarks at this morning's meeting he had referred to the condition of the Government securities market in yesterday's light trading. The members of the Committee had subsequently received a summary of conditions in the market at 11:00 a.m. today.  Following the Committee meeting, he had talked with the Trading Desk and had found that another wave of selling was developing.  This was in accord with the pattern that the market had been following; it would steady for a time and then another wave of selling would develop. That seemed to be the course of events again today.  The market yesterday was down in a number of cases in terms of thirty-seconds, and it was down in similar amounts today. The 3-1/2 per cent bonds of 1990 were now down to 98.  Much of the time, Mr. Rouse said, there were no bids and no buyers. One dealer had been able to work out some swaps but had not been able to do outright business. The outstanding Treasury certificates were off a thirty-second in some cases, and the new ones were quoted below par and were available in volume. The whole picture was one of gloom and a fading market, and reports from dealers were to the effect that the element of speculation in the market was greater than anyone had visualized. One dealer termed the market disorderly in the sense that there were no bids, while another expressed the view that the market was "in the disorderly range." 7/29/58 -3An insurance company spokesman was of the opinion that the market had been disorderly for days.  In response to an inquiry from Chairman Martin, Mr. Rouse summarized available information on subscriptions for the new Treasury 1-1/2 per cent tax anticipation certificate. In the course of his summary he said that a private survey of 25 large banks by a securities dealer indicated subscriptions by those banks amounting to $2.7 billion, which led the dealer to estimate that the allotment would be around 50 per cent. However, the picture was not yet clear enough to make accurate predictions about the fate of the issue.  Continuing, Mr. Rouse said it seemed to him that the amount of potential selling in the Government bond market was not known.  After a price decline which had by now certainly reached the four or five points mentioned by Mr. Balderston at this morning's meeting, one might expect that there would be an unwillingness to take the losses entailed in those prices and that selling would tend to dry up. However, speculative holders who had delayed selling, in the thought that prices would get a little better and that the System would step in, might now feel that it was better to get out.  Chairman Martin commented that the sooner such elements got out of the market the better it would be from the standpoint of the System.  Mr. Rouse agreed. He went on to say that the System undoubtedly would be criticized if this was really a disorderly market 7/29/58 -4and the System had not appeared in it for the last two or three days.  Turning to available alternatives, he said that one possibility would be for the Federal Reserve Banks to do a little "arm-twisting" as far as the subscriptions to the Treasury certificates were concerned, in an effort to assure that the financing did not "fall out of bed." As to possible System intervention in the market, Mr. Rouse expressed the view that it would be unwise to try to do more than insert a few bids through brokers in a nameless way in the hope of having a modest amount of transactions at levels as the market went down. To go direct to the market and start to buy would invite an avalanche of offers, and that, of course, was something to avoid. Furthermore, if the Federal Reserve acted to support the market, the speculators would be apt to stay in.  Mr. Rouse stated that he was inclined to recommend staying out of the market, or at most doing something through brokers in a nameless way and attempting some arm-twisting with respect to the certificate subscriptions.  Chairman Martin asked whether it was not too late in the day for the System to do anything that would substantially affect the subscriptions, to which Mr. Rouse replied that he thought a little could be done. Of course, the word would get around to some extent and the official closing time of the market is only nominal under prevailing market conditions. 7/29/58 -5The Chairman then stated that the Committee seemed to be right up against the wall and that it seemed best to stand or fall right here. Personally, he would be disposed to stay out but watch carefully. He then called upon the other members of the Committee for comment.  Mr. Mills said that he could not add anything to the statement which he made at this morning's meeting. He strongly believed that the System Account should intervene aggressively and support the market. If the Committee was not disposed to do that, he would be fearful of making bids on a declining basis through brokers without revealing the source. There is general public knowledge that the Open Market Committee meets at three-week intervals, so he presumed there was an understanding that a meeting had been held today. The market therefore would be looking for an indication of System policy today, or certainly at the opening of the market tomorrow, and if support was not forthcoming the market could reasonably reach the conclusion that the Committee had refused to declare a disorderly condition and had abandoned the market. Under those circumstances, there could be complete disorder.  It was an unfortunate circumstance, Mr. Mills said, that today the books were open for subscription to the new issue of Treasury certificates, for if the System intervened in the market the inference would be drawn that its primary, or at least a secondary, purpose had been to assist the Treasury rather than to correct a disorderly market. 7/29/58In response to a question from Mr. Rouse, Mr. Mills verified that even so he would advocate going into the market, with full knowledge of the risks involved. Intervention on the part of the System might inspire a greater volume of sales rather than stem sales. However, in almost all cases sales made at the present levels would involve losses, and it was difficult for him to reason that people would willingly take those losses if there was an indication that the market would be stabilized by the institution that had the ability and armament to provide stability.  At this point Mr. Vardaman joined the meeting and Mr. Rouse reviewed for him the market situation that had resulted in this meeting being called.  Mr. Hayes said that he favored going into the market last time but that he was troubled by the thought of going in on a very temporary basis, really with the Treasury financing primarily in mind, and then almost immediately pulling out. If he were doing it himself, he would be glad to go in, but only on the condition that the System was going to stay in for quite a while and cushion the market. Since he saw no disposition in that direction on the part of the majority of the Committee, he would not want to go into the market now.  Messrs. Irons, Allen, Leedy, and Vardaman expressed agreement with the view that the System should stay out of the market today and see what happened. In response to an inquiry by Mr.  Vardaman regarding the inference to be drawn from the use of the word "today" in these comments, Chairman Martin said he did not think it was fair to ask the Manager of the Account to take the responsibility. It was fortunate, he said, that the Manager was here today and that this meeting could be held.  The remaining members of the Committee, except Mr. Mills, then expressed concurrence in the view that the System should stay out of the market today, as did the other Reserve Bank Presidents who were present.  In response to a question raised by Mr. Balderston, Mr.  Keir said that the 3-1/2s of 1990 would have to fall to 95-13/32 to sell on a 3-3/4 per cent yield basis. Mr. Balderston said he asked the question because he felt that if and when the System had to intervene in the market again, it should be when the price level was such that the System could make its intervention stick, and so convincingly that other market forces would come in to assist and "pick up the ball" from that point.  Mr. Bryan inquired as to possibilities if the Treasury offering today were to fail, and Mr. Thomas commented that the Treasury had plenty of money on which to operate for a time, for it would, of course, get something from today's offering. If necessary, one possibility would be to increase the weekly bill auction.7/29/58-7- 7/29/58 -8Mr. Bryan then inquired about the possibility of using the direct borrowing authority on a short-term basis while the Treasury was regrouping its forces, as opposed to System assistance to the market on a scale that could not be foreseen. He agreed with a comment by the Chairman that one could hardly expect a regrouping of the market within a period of a few days.  After some discussion of the question raised by Mr. Bryan, Mr. Robertson suggested that in any event there was not much that the System could do between 3:10 (the present time) and 3:30 to affect the outcome of the Treasury offering. Mr. Rouse said that he did not concur completely. He felt that the System could do something; that System action would have a little effect on the success of the Treasury issue.  In a restatement of his position, Mr. Hayes said that he had aligned himself with the majority, but reluctantly. If he had felt that the majority would go as far as he personally wanted to to, that is, to have a sustained cushioning of the market, he would favor that course. In reply to an inquiry by Mr. Vardaman, he said that the cushioning might be at descending, but slowly descending, prices.  Mr. Rouse commented that he was puzzled about the significance of the 3-3/4 per cent rate mentioned by Mr. Balderston as against the present rate. He noted that the 3-1/2s of 1990 had moved in price to 7/29/58 -9where they were close to a 3.60 yield basis. If Mr. Balderston was thinking in terms of the possibility of a shooting war, it was his (Mr. Rouse's) thought that the present rate might be as satisfactory as a 3-3/4 per cent rate at which to hold, for otherwise the level of rates on business credit might be extremely high.  A 3-3/4 per cent rate to the Government would mean about a 4.35 rate on AAA bonds, about 4.75 on AA bonds, and perhaps 5-1/2 per cent on bonds rated BAA. Thus, there would not be much room for flexibility, for the rates would almost be up against the ceiling.  Mr. Balderston replied that the Canadians evidently concluded that for them a 4-1/2 per cent rate would be appropriate for 25-year bonds. He asked what rate was reached under free market conditions at the height of the 1955-57 boom.  Mr. Rouse commented in response that if the Treasury had had to do any long-term financing, a 4 per cent bond would have been required.  Mr. Balderston said that his 3-3/4 per cent rate was on the lower side of the range that he thought would be indicated in the event of a shooting war. More likely was a combination of an expensive cold war and expansionary conditions in the civilian sector of the economy. A combination of private and public borrowing under such circumstances would push the price of money up so that a 4 per cent level was as likely as any other. Asked by Mr. Vardaman whether 7/29/58 -10his comments meant that he would favor entering the market at the 3-3/4 per cent level, Mr. Balderston said that he would put his answer in terms that he would not want to see "the cat's tail cut off inch by inch." Mr. Vardaman then stated reasons why he felt that the ultimate level of rates might be higher than suggested by Mr.  Balderston. For these reasons, he said, he would want to think a long time before stepping into the market at the 3-3/4 per cent level and offering encouragement that the market would stick at that level.  Mr. Balderston commented that a 4 per cent yield for the 3-1/2s would mean a price of 90, and that he thought a drop to such a price would mean a more disorderly market than could be tolerated.  Chairman Martin raised certain questions about the likelihood of institutional selling at present market levels and about the rumored possibility of a situation of panic developing.  Mr. Hayes commented that he did not think it was the level of prices as much as the lack of a market that was disturbing to public psychology. If he were managing the portfolio of a bank or insurance company, Mr. Hayes said, he would be slower in going into the market next time, and Chairman Martin expressed agreement with that comment. 7/29/58 -11In further discussion of the questions raised by the Chairman, Mr. Vardaman said that he could not imagine holders dumping securities, for the tax-saving stage was now past. A more likely prospect was a virtual suspension of trading, following which trading might be renewed on a more realistic basis.  Mr. Hayes said he saw a big difference between where rates might go under inflationary psychology and where they might go in the event of a shooting war. It was quite clear to him that in the latter event yields could go up to a 4 per cent basis, but he was not sure whether that would be the right rate. At present, he noted, yields were already in the upper part of the range established over a 50-year period.  Additional comments were to the effect that at a certain level it would be hoped that a self-correcting movement would occur in the market. Mr. Allen agreed with Mr. Vardaman in thinking that present holders of bonds would not be apt to get panicky and that they would tend to sit tight, knowing that they had good bonds. That, he felt, would be true in the case of banks holding the 2-5/8 per cent bonds, at least until a strong loan demand developed.  Mr. Bryan returned to the possibility of a failure of today's Treasury issue and use of the direct borrowing authority, if necessary, in order to avoid acute embarrassment. He asked whether such a course would not be less shocking to the market than for the 7/29/58 -12System to bail out the Treasury with unlimited funds.  During a discussion of that point, Mr. Hayes commented that one could not look with any sort of equanimity on the failure of a Treasury financing, and Chairman Martin expressed agreement.  Mr. Hayes also made the comment that every dollar the System put into the market last week had saved more than a dollar in the way of attrition. When some doubt was expressed by Messrs. Vardaman and Robertson, he said that without question the System operations had caused a number of people to exchange.  At this point Mr. Rouse, who had left the room to talk with the Trading Desk, returned and said that although there was not too much selling of securities, buyers continued to be missing from the market. However, the market had not gotten any worse; in fact, it might be a little better. A dealer's survey indicated that the large banks included in the survey were subscribing to a little over $3 billion of the 1-1/2 per cent tax anticipation certificates.  At the request of the Treasury, a representative of the New York Bank was approaching some of the New York City banks informally for information on their plans and some line on the situation therefore might be available in the next hour.  Chairman Martin then stated that another telephone meeting of the Committee would be held tomorrow morning at 10:45 a.m. to 7/29/58 -13appraise early developments in the market.  The meeting then adjourned.  Secretary