 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in theoffices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington on Tuesday, March 7, 1961, at 10:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Martin, ChairmanMr. Hayes, Vice ChairmanMr. AllenMr. BalderstonMr. IronsMr. KingMr. MillsMr. RobertsonMr. ShepardsonMr. SwanMr. SzymczakMr. WayneMessrs. Ellis, Fulton, Johns, and Deming, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Bopp, Bryan, and Clay, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Atlanta,and Kansas City, respectivelyMr. Young, SecretaryMr. Sherman, Assistant SecretaryMr. Kenyon, Assistant SecretaryMr. Hackley, General CounselMr. Hexter, Assistant General CounselMr. Thomas, EconomistMessrs. Einzig, Garvy, Mitchell, Noyes andWalker, Associate EconomistsMr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market AccountMr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Marget, Director, Division of InternationalFinanceMessrs. Holland and Koch, Advisers, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Knipe, Consultant to the Chairman, Board ofGovernorsMr. Yager, Economist, Government Finance Section,Division of Research and Statistics, Board ofGovernors 3/7/61 -2-Mr. Petersen, Special Assistant, Office of theSecretary, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Eastburn, Jones, Parsons, and Tow, VicePresidents of the Federal Reserve Banks ofPhiladelphia, St. Louis, Minneapolis, andKansas City, respectivelyMr. Black, Assistant Vice President, FederalReserve Bank of RichmondMr. Eisenmenger, Acting Director of Research,Federal Reserve Bank of BostonMr. Brandt, Assistant Cashier, Federal ReserveBank of AtlantaMr. Holmes, Manager, Securities Department,Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkIn the agenda for this meeting, the Secretary reported thatadvice had been received of the election by the Federal Reserve Banksof members and alternate members of the Federal Open Market Committeefor a period of one year commencing March 1, 1961, and that it appearedthe persons would be legally qualified to serve after they had executedtheir oaths of office. Prior to the meeting, each newly elected memberand alternate member had executed the required oath of office. Themembers and alternate members were as follows:Alfred Hayes, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of NewYork, with William F. Treiber, First Vice President ofthe Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as alternate member;Edward A. Wayne, President of the Federal Reserve Bank ofRichmond, with George H. Ellis, President of the FederalReserve Bank of Boston, as alternate member;Carl E. Allen, President of the Federal Reserve Bank ofChicago, with W. D. Fulton, President of the FederalReserve Bank of Cleveland, as alternate member;Watrous H. Irons, President of the Federal Reserve Bank ofDallas, with Delos C. Johns, President of the FederalReserve Bank of St. Louis, as alternate member; 3/7/61Wm. McC. Martin, Jr.Alfred HayesRalph A. YoungMerritt ShermanKenneth A. KenyonHoward H. HackleyDavid B. HexterWoodlief ThomasRobert S. Einzig, George Garvy,George Mitchell, Guy E. Noyes,Benjamin U. Ratchford, andCharls E. WalkerChairmanVice ChairmanSecretaryAssistant SecretaryAssistant SecretaryGeneral CounselAssistant General CounselEconomistAssociate EconomistsUpon motion duly made and seconded, andby unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bankof New York was selected to execute trans-actions for the System Open Market Accountuntil the adjournment of the first meetingof the Committee after February 28, 1962.Upon motion duly made and seconded, andby unanimous vote, the selection by the Boardof Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank ofNew York of Robert G. Rouse as Manager of theSystem Open Market Account was approved.Upon motion duly made and seconded, andby unanimous vote, the minutes of the meetingsof the Federal Open Market Committee held onJanuary 24 and February 7, 1961, were approved.-3-Eliot J. Swan, President of the Federal Reserve Bankof San Francisco, with Frederick L. Deming, Presidentof the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, as alter-nate member.Upon motion duly made and seconded, andby unanimous vote, the following officers ofthe Federal Open Market Committee were electedto serve until the election of their successorsat the first meeting of the Committee afterFebruary 28, 1962, with the understanding thatin the event of the discontinuance of theirofficial connection with the Board of Governorsor with a Federal Reserve Bank, as the casemight be, they would cease to have any officialconnection with the Federal Open Market Committee: 3/7/61 -4-The next item listed on the agenda for consideration was thereview of the Committee's continuing operating policies, as follows:a. It is not now the policy of the Committee to support anypattern of prices and yields in the Government securitiesmarket, and intervention in the Government securitiesmarket is solely to effectuate the objectives of monetaryand credit policy (including correction of disorderlymarkets).b. Operations for the System Account in the open market, otherthan repurchase agreements, shall be confined to short-termsecurities (except in the correction of disorderly markets),and during a period of Treasury financing there shall be nopurchases of (1) maturing issues for which an exchange isbeing offered, (2) when-issued securities, or (3) outstandingissues of comparable maturities to those being offered forexchange; these policies to be followed until such time asthey may be superseded or modified by further action of theFederal Open Market Committee.c. Transactions for the System Account in the open market shallbe entered into solely for the purpose of providing orabsorbing reserves (except in the correction of disorderlymarkets), and shall not include offsetting purchases andsales of securities for the purpose of altering the maturitypattern of the System's portfolio; such policy to be followeduntil such time as it may be superseded or modified byfurther action of the Federal Open Market Committee.Chairman Martin stated that the Ad Hoc Subcommittee appointedat the meeting of the Open Market Committee on January 10, 1961, metyesterday afternoon and had a general discussion. It was the unanimousfeeling of the Subcommittee that a great deal of conscientious andexcellent work had been done on the study of the continuing operatingpolicies. However, since this was such an important matter, it wasfelt that it would not be wise to try to hasten to a conclusion.Therefore, it was the suggestion of the Subcommittee that consideration 3/7/61 -5-of possible changes in the operating policy statements be tabled inorder that everyone might have an opportunity to review and studycarefully all of the material compiled by the Subcommittee.The Chairman then turned to Mr. young, who stated that inpreparation for a recommendation by the Subcommittee on the operatingpolicies the secretariat undertook a draft that was thought to beconsistent with the prevailing thinking. This draft was sent to themembers of the Subcommittee prior to the meeting yesterday afternoon.Also, after consultation with Chairman Martin, the draft was sent toall Committee members and Presidents not currently serving on theCommittee in order to obtain comments and reaction. Various commentsand memoranda were received in reply, following which the secretariattook an inventory of the suggestions and recast the original draftmaterial. In doing so, an effort was made to take into account tothe fullest extent possible the suggestions that had been advanced,if not directly then by some manner of rephrasing. One issue thatremained for decision was whether any revised statements should becalled operating "policies" or operating "rules of practice." Anotherissue was whether the material should be reduced to the fewest possiblestatements or whether the material should be kept rather inclusive.The New York Bank, for example, had proposed in a memorandum from Mr.Hayes dated March 1, 1961, that the number of rules be kept to aminimum. A further question was whether the authority to engage in 3/7/61 -6-transactions in longer-term Government securities should be reserved tothe Committee or whether open authority should be given to the Managementof the Open Market Account. This question, on which the secretariat wentone way and the memorandum from Mr. Hayes went in the other direction,must be thought through carefully by the Committee and a decision reached.There was also the question whether it would be desirable that theCommittee's directive to the New York Bank, as the Reserve Bank selectedto execute transactions for the System Account, be divided into astanding authorization and a current policy directive. The standingauthorization would contain the detailed instructions for operation ofthe System Account that change only rarely, while the current policydirective would outline the specific monetary objectives to be soughtin open market transactions during the period from the close of themeeting at which the directive was adopted until the next meeting. Thesecretariat rather leaned toward the view that it would be desirable tobreak the directive into these two parts, and generally that view seemedto have found favor with the Committee members and other Presidents.However, at least one member of the Subcommittee felt that in makingthe division the Committee should go further and provide a currentpolicy directive that would include enough specifications to definequite precisely the range within which the Manager of the Account mightoperate until the succeeding meeting of the Committee. This again wasa matter that the Committee must think through, discuss, and decide. 3/7/61Chairman Martin stated that all of the members of the Committeeand Presidents not currently serving on the Committee either had orwould receive all of the draft material mentioned by Mr. Young. He thensaid that unless there were general comments this morning, he wouldsuggest that further consideration of the subject be tabled until alater meeting.Mr. Mills said that on reading the secretariat's proposal andthe suggested amendments to it, his reaction had been that the operatingpolicies should be streamlined and that the flexibility in the operationof the Account should be focused in the directive given by the Committeeat each of its meetings. He did not know whether other members of theAd Hoc Subcommittee had approached the problem in that way. However,it seemed to him that this was a fundamental question that must come upfor decision by the entire Committee.The Chairman then turned to Mr. Irons, who said that he thoughtMr. Young had presented the issues quite clearly. It would be desirablefor all of the Committee members to review fully what had been done thusfar, and then the Committee must try to reach a decision.Chairman Martin pointed out that Mr. Bryan was one of the Com-mittee members originally named to the Ad Hoc Subcommittee. In Mr.Bryan's subsequent absence, his alternate on the Open Market Committee(Mr. Irons) had been asked to participate in the work of the Subcommittee.Now that Mr. Bryan had returned, both he and Mr. Irons would be includedon the Subcommittee. 3/7/61 -8-Mr. Hayes said he had a good deal of sympathy with what Mr.Mills had said. It seemed to him that the memorandum he (Mr. Hayes)had submitted spoke for itself. In brief, he felt that the broader andmore flexible the statement of operating policies could be, the betterit would be in the light of all the present circumstances. There wasno disposition at all on his part or, he felt sure, on the part of Mr.Rouse to limit the complete authority of the Committee to change itsmind at each meeting and give whatever instructions it desired to theManager of the Account. However, the idea of having the briefest possiblecontinuing policy statement seemed worthy of consideration.Mr. Balderston commented that a rather specific current operatingdirective such as had been suggested by Mr. Irons would be difficult toprepare immediately at the conclusion of each meeting. He (Mr. Balderston)had sympathy with the need for better communication with the Desk bysome means. However, if Mr. Irons' idea were favored, thought would haveto be given to the method of implementing it.There being no further comments, it was agreed to table theconsideration of the possible changes in the operating policy statements.Consideration was next given to the continuing authorizations ofthe Committee customarily reviewed at the first meeting in March of eachyear, and the actions set forth subsequently in these minutes were takenconcerning the matters that had been listed on the agenda for review atthis meeting. 3/7/61 -9-It was agreed unanimously that no actionshould be taken at this time to amend orterminate the resolution of November 20, 1936,authorizing each Federal Reserve Bank topurchase and sell, at home and abroad, cabletransfers, bills of exchange, and bankers'acceptances payable in foreign currencies, tothe extent that such purchases and sales maybe deemed to be necessary or advisable inconnection with the establishment, maintenance,operation, increase, reduction, or discontinu-ance of accounts of Federal Reserve Banks inforeign countries.A plan for allocation of securities in the System Open MarketAccount on the basis of total assets of the Reserve Banks became effectiveSeptember 1, 1953, pursuant to action of the Federal Open Market Committeeat its meeting on June 11, 1953. This procedure was amended at the meetingon March 1, 1960, effective April 1, 1960. Prior to this meeting, therehad been distributed to the members of the Committee (1) a memorandumfrom Messrs. Rouse, Manager of the System Open Market Account, andFarrell, Director of the Board's Division of Bank Operations, datedFebruary 24, 1961, containing a pro forma reallocation of securities heldin the System Account as of February 1, 1961, and (2) a memorandum fromMessrs. Rouse and Farrell dated February 28, 1961, recommending an amend-ment to the statement of procedure for allocating the System Open MarketAccount.The proposed change in the statement of procedure involved thefourth paragraph only, which currently read as follows:4. Increases and decreases in total amount held in theAccount shall be apportioned on the basis of the ratioscomputed for the latest general reallocation. 3/7/61 -10-Mr. Rouse said that the proposed change, as follows, was intendedto clarify the existing language and did not involve any revision ofcurrent procedure:4. The Account shall be apportioned during the ensuingtwelve months on the basis of the total assets ratioscomputed for the latest general reallocation afterallowing for any adjustments as provided for in Para-graph 3, unless there shall be further adjustmentsdescribed in Paragraphs 5 or 6.Thereupon, upon motion duly made andseconded, the procedure for allocation ofsecurities in the System Open Market Accountadopted pursuant to action of the FederalOpen Market Committee on June 11, 1953, andamended at the meeting on March 1, 1960, effec-tive as of the April 1, 1960, reallocation, wasfurther amended, effective as of the April 3,1961, reallocation, to reflect incorporation ofthe change recommended in the memorandum fromMessrs. Rouse and Farrell dated February 28,1961, it being understood that the reallocationto be made as of April 3, 1961, would be basedon the ratios of each Reserve Bank's dailyaverage of total assets to the total for allReserve Banks for the period March 1, 1960,through February 28, 1961.It was agreed unanimously to continuethe existing authorization for distributionof periodic reports prepared by the FederalReserve Bank of New York for the FederalOpen Market Committee, as follows:1. The Members of the Board of Governors.2. The Presidents of the twelve Federal Reserve Banks.3. Officers of the Federal Open Market Committee.*4. The Secretary of the Treasury.*5. The Under Secretary of the Treasury for Monetary Affairs.*6. The Assistant to the Secretary of the Treasury working ondebt management problems.*7. The Fiscal Assistant Secretary of the Treasury.* Weekly reports of open market operations only. 3/7/61 -11-8. The Director of the Division of Bank Operations of theBoard of Governors.9. The officer in charge of research at each of the FederalReserve Banks not represented by its President on theFederal Open Market Committee.10. The alternate member of the Federal Open Market Committeefrom the Federal Reserve Bank of New York; the AssistantVice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New Yorkworking under the Manager of the System Account; theManagers of the Securities Department of the New YorkBank; the officer in charge and the Assistant VicePresident of the Research Department of the New YorkBank; and the confidential files of the New York Bankas the Bank selected to execute transactions for theFederal Open Market Committee.11. With the approval of a member of the Federal Open MarketCommittee or any other President of a Federal ReserveBank, with notice to the Secretary, any other employeeof the Board of Governors or of a Federal Reserve Bank.Unanimous approval was given to thecontinuation of the authorization to theManager of the System Account to engage intransactions on a cash as well as a regulardelivery basis.Upon motion duly made and seconded, theCommittee approved, with Mr. Robertson dis-senting, a renewal of the existing authorizationto the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to enterinto repurchase agreements with nonbank dealersin United States Government securities, subjectto the following conditions:1. Such agreements(a) In no event shall be at a rate below whichever isthe lower of (1) the discount rate of the FederalReserve Bank on eligible commercial paper, or (2)the average issuing rate on the most recent issueof three-month Treasury bills;(b) Shall be for periods of not to exceed 15 calendardays;(c) Shall cover only Government securities maturingwithin 15 months; and(d) Shall be used as a means of providing the moneymarket with sufficient Federal Reserve funds toavoid undue strain on a day-to-day basis. 3/7/61 -12-2. Reports of such transactions shall be included in theweekly report of open market operations which is sentto the members of the Federal Open Market Committee.3. In the event Government securities covered by any suchagreement are not repurchased by the dealer pursuant tothe agreement or a renewal thereof, the securities thusacquired by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York shallbe sold in the market or transferred to the System OpenMarket Account.Mr. Robertson dissented on the ground that in his opinionrepurchase agreements are, in fact, not purchases of securities in theopen market, such as the Reserve Banks are authorized by law to enterinto, but instead are loans to dealers at fixed interest rates thatare not related to yield on the securities, and that such loans arebeyond the statutory authority of the Reserve Banks. He realized thatother members of the Committee considered such purchases legal, but inview of his doubt as to the legality thereof he believed the repurchaseagreements should not be entered into on a wholesale basis, as they hadbeen during the past year, but rather should be used only as a lastresort to finance dealers who are unable to obtain loans at reasonablerates from others in order to aid them in maintaining an adequate marketfor Government securities.Furthermore, he was of the opinion that, for reasons he hadstated many times during the past eight years, nonbank dealers shouldnot be given preferential treatment by being furnished loans from theFederal Reserve Bank of New York at lower rates than member banks areobliged to pay for loans from the same Reserve Bank. 3/7/61 -13-The Committee approved, with Mr.Robertson dissenting, a renewal of theauthorization to the Federal Reserve Bankof New York (last renewed March 1, 1960)to purchase bankers' acceptances and toenter into repurchase agreements therefor.The authorization was as follows:The Federal Open Market Committee hereby authorizes theFederal Reserve Bank of New York for its own account to buyfrom and sell to acceptance dealers and foreign accounts main-tained at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at marketrates of discount, prime bankers' acceptances of the kindsdesignated in the regulations of the Federal Open Market Com-mittee, at such times and in such amounts as may be advisableand consistent with the general credit policies and instructionsof the Federal Open Market Committee, provided that the aggregateamount of such bankers' acceptances held at any one time by theFederal Reserve Bank of New York shall not exceed $75 million,and provided further that such holdings shall not be more than10 per cent of the total of bankers' acceptances outstandingas shown in the most recent acceptance survey conducted by theFederal Reserve Bank of New York.The Federal Open Market Committee further authorizes theFederal Reserve Bank of New York to enter into repurchaseagreements with nonbank dealers in bankers' acceptances coveringprime bankers' acceptances of the kinds designated in theregulations of the Federal Open Market Committee, subject tothe same conditions on which the Federal Reserve Bank of NewYork is now or may hereafter be authorized from time to timeby the Federal Open Market Committee to enter into repurchaseagreements covering United States Government securities,except that the maturities of such bankers' acceptances atthe time of entering into such repurchase agreements shallnot exceed six months, and except that in the event of thefailure of the seller to repurchase, such acceptances shallcontinue to be held by the Federal Reserve Bank or shall beat the same rate as that applicable, at the time of enteringinto such agreements, to repurchase agreements covering UnitedStates Government securities.Mr. Robertson voted against the renewal of the authority topurchase bankers' acceptances because he felt that the Federal Reserve 3/7/61 -14-System should encourage the utmost freedom of market forces and there-fore should withdraw from active participation in the acceptance marketin the absence of clear indication that such participation would yieldspecific public interest benefits. He was not aware of any evidencethat such benefits had been realized since the authorization was givento the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in 1955. Needless to say, hewould oppose the use of repurchase agreements covering bankers'acceptances not only for these reasons but also for the reasons he hadgiven for opposing the use of repurchase agreements covering Governmentsecurities.Mr. Hayes stated that when the acceptance market started inNew York the Federal Reserve System took an active interest in promotingand helping it. In his opinion the System had a legitimate interestin doing its part to make that market as broad and sound as possible.Acceptances, he said, are inherently a desirable medium for operationsby a central bank. Further, the participation of the Federal Reservewas such a small fraction of the total of acceptances outstanding thatin no sense could it be said that the Federal Reserve was making themarket.Mr. Robertson said that he had a fundamental belief in freemarkets, with as little intervention on the part of Governmentalauthorities as possible. The acceptance market was an area where itwas not necessary to intervene. As he saw it, the Federal Reserve couldnot help but affect the market through its operations, to no good purpose. 3/7/61 -15-The Committee approved by unanimous votethe continuation without change of the existingauthorization for fixing the rate charged onspecial short-term certificates of indebtednesspurchased direct from the Treasury, pursuant toparagraph (2) of the Committee's policy directiveto the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at 1/4of 1 per cent below the discount rate of theFederal Reserve Bank of New York at the time ofsuch purchase.The Committee reaffirmed by unanimous votethe authorization for the Chairman to appoint aFederal Reserve Bank to operate the SystemAccount temporarily in case the Federal ReserveBank of New York is unable to function, suchauthorization having first been given on March 1,1951, and having been renewed in March of eachyear since.The following resolution to provide forthe continued operation of the Federal OpenMarket Committee during an emergency was reaf-firmed by unanimous vote:In the event of war or defense emergency, if the Secretaryor Assistant Secretary of the Federal Open Market Committee(or in the event of the unavailability of both of them, theSecretary or Acting Secretary of the Board of Governors of theFederal Reserve System) certifies that as a result of theemergency the available number of regular members and regularalternates of the Federal Open Market Committee is less thanseven, all powers and functions of the said Committee shall beperformed and exercised by, and authority to exercise suchpowers and functions is hereby delegated to, an Interim Com-mittee, subject to the following terms and conditions:Such Iterim Committee shall consist of seven members,comprising each regular member and regular alternate of theFederal Open Market Committee then available, together withan additional number, sufficient to make a total of seven,which shall be made up in the following order of priorityfrom those available: (1) each alternate at large (as definedbelow); (2) each President of a Federal Reserve Bank not theneither a regular member or an alternate; (3) each First Vice 3/7/61 -16-President of a Federal Reserve Bank, provided that (a) withineach of the groups referred to in clauses (1), (2), and (3)priority of selection shall be in numerical order accordingto the numbers of the Federal Reserve Districts, (b) thePresident and the First Vice President of the same FederalReserve Bank shall not serve at the same time as members ofthe Interim Committee, and (c) whenever a regular member orregular alternate of the Federal Open Market Committee or aperson having a higher priority as indicated in clauses (1),(2), and (3) becomes available he shall become a member of theInterim Committee in the place of the person then on theInterim Committee having the lowest priority. The InterimCommittee is hereby authorized to take action by majorityvote of those present whenever one or more members thereofare present, provided that an affirmative vote for the actiontaken is cast by at least one regular member, regular alternate,or President of a Federal Reserve Bank. The delegation ofauthority and other procedures set forth above shall beeffective only during such period or periods as there areavailable less than a total of seven regular members andregular alternates of the Federal Open Market Committee.As used herein the term "regular member" refers to amember of the Federal Open Market Committee duly appointedor elected in accordance with existing law; the term "regularalternate" refers to an alternate of the Committee dulyelected in accordance with existing law and serving in theabsence of the regular member for whom he was elected; andthe term "alternate at large" refers to any other dulyelected alternate of the Committee at a time when the memberin whose absence he was elected to serve is available.Unanimous approval was also given to arenewal of the resolution set forth belowauthorizing certain actions by the FederalReserve Banks during an emergency:The Federal Open Market Committee hereby authorizes eachFederal Reserve Bank to take any or all of the actions setforth below during war or defense emergency when such FederalReserve Bank finds itself unable after reasonable efforts tobe in communication with the Federal Open Market Committee(or with the Interim Committee acting in lieu of the FederalOpen Market Committee) or when the Federal Open Market Com-mittee (or such Interim Committee) is unable to function. 3/7/61 -17-(1) Whenever it deems it necessary in the light ofeconomic conditions and the general credit situation thenprevailing (after taking into account the possibility ofproviding necessary credit through advances secured by directobligations of the United States under the last paragraph ofsection 13 of the Federal Reserve Act), such Federal ReserveBank may purchase and sell obligations of the United Statesfor its own account, either outright or under repurchaseagreement, from and to banks, dealers, or other holders ofsuch obligations.(2) In case any prospective seller of obligations ofthe United States to a Federal Reserve Bank is unable totender the actual securities representing such obligationsbecause of conditions resulting from the emergency, suchFederal Reserve Bank may, in its discretion and subject tosuch safeguards as it deems necessary, accept from such seller,in lieu of the actual securities, a "due bill" executed by theseller in form acceptable to such Federal Reserve Bank statingin substantial effect that the seller is the owner of theobligations which are the subject of the purchase, that owner-ship of such obligations is thereby transferred to the FederalReserve Bank, and that the obligations themselves will bedelivered to the Federal Reserve Bank as soon as possible.(3) Such Federal Reserve Bank may in its discretionpurchase special certificates of indebtedness directly fromthe United States in such amounts as may be needed to coveroverdrafts in the general account of the Treasurer of theUnited States on the books of such Bank or for the temporaryaccommodation of the Treasury, but such Bank shall take allsteps practicable at the time to insure as far as possiblethat the amount of obligations acquired directly from the UnitedStates and held by it, together with the amount of suchobligations so acquired and held by all other Federal ReserveBanks, does not exceed $5 billion at any one time.Authority to take the actions above set forth shall beeffective only until such time as the Federal Reserve Bank isable again to establish communications with the Federal OpenMarket Committee (or the Interim Committee), and such Can-mittee is then functioning.By unanimous vote, the Committee reaf-firmed the authorization given at the meetingon December 16, 1958, and continued at themeeting on March 1, 1960, providing for System 3/7/61 -18-personnel assigned to the Office of Civiland Defense Mobilization ClassifiedLocation (High Point) on a rotating basisto have access to the resolutions (1) pro-viding for continued operation of theCommittee during an emergency and (2)authorizing certain actions by the FederalReserve Banks during an emergency.There was unanimous agreement that noaction be taken to change the existingprocedure, as called for by the resolutionadopted June 21, 1939, requesting the Boardof Governors to cause its examining forceto furnish the Secretary of the FederalOpen Market Committee a report of eachexamination of the System Open Market Account.Chairman Martin then referred to a memorandum distributed withthe agenda under date of March 1, 1961, relating to the procedureauthorized at the meeting of March 2, 1955, whereby, in addition tomembers and officers of the Committee and Reserve Bank Presidents notcurrently members of the Committee, minutes and other records could bemade available to any other employee of the Board of Governors or ofa Federal Reserve Bank with the approval of a member of the Committeeor other Reserve Bank President, with notice to the Secretary. Themost recent list of persons so authorized (exclusive of secretariesand records and duplicating personnel), as shown by the Secretary'srecords, was attached to the March 1 memorandum.Chairman Martin asked whether anyone wished to raise a questionwith respect to the existing procedure, and no questions were heard.Accordingly, it was agreed unani-mously that no action should be taken atthis time to amend the procedure authorizedon March 2, 1955. 3/7/61 -19-At this point Chairman Martin said that he wished to make thefollowing statement. As indicated by the minutes of the meeting of theCommittee on February 7, 1961, it was clearly the understanding that nostatement would be released in connection with the decision of theCommittee to authorize operations in longer-term Government securities.However, a statement was released on February 20, 1961, coincident withthe first operations under the Committee's authorization. He merelywanted to say that although he had cooperated with the Management ofthe System Account in the issuance of the statement, it was his(Chairman Martin's) decision that the statement should be issued.It was not until the last minute that one could be sure whether ornot a statement seemed advisable, but in view of developments thatoccurred between the date of the Committee meeting and the initialtransactions for the System Account, he thought the majority would havesupported him in the action taken. At the same time, he did not wantanyone to have the impression that the Manager of the Account was inany way acting on his own in making the announcement on February 20;whatever responsibility there was in the matter attached to him (ChairmanMartin) and not to the Manager of the Account.Mr. Rouse said that he would like to share some of the responsi-bility for issuance of the statement. His thought had been that it wasessential to make such a statement if individual dealers, groups ofdealers, or other parties were not to have special advantages accruingto them. Before the meeting there had been distributed to the members ofthe Committee a report of open market operations covering the periodFebruary 7 through March 1, 1961, including a brief review of the periodsince December 7, 1960. A supplemental report covering the period March 2through March 6, 1961, had also been distributed. Copies of both reportshave been placed in the files of the Committee.In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Rouse commentedas follows:Since the last meeting of the Federal Open Market Com-mittee a month ago, money and reserve conditions have beengenerally comfortable except immediately before and afterthe Lincoln day weekend when the situation was aggravated bythe sizable cumulative deficit accumulating against the NewYork banks over the weekend. While we have had some helpfrom unexpectedly high levels of float as a result of badweather and the airlines strike, the System has been ableto add reserves when they were most needed without puttingundue downward pressure on short-term rates. Except forthe past few days, Treasury bill rates rose over the period,partly because the System found it possible to avoidpurchases of Treasury bills by supplying reserves whenneeded through repurchase agreements and through purchasesof other than short-term issues. Here again, the Systemhad some help from (1) the announcement by the large NewYork banks of their plans for issuing time certificates ofdeposit to corporations, which would tend to create compe-tition for Treasury bills; (2) the early expectations of apoor bill market until after the March tax date, which nowby the way have given way to a more optimistic view; and(3) the growing feeling that the System's new policy ofoperating in a broader range of issues would mean higher(or at least no lower) short-term rates. Over the past fewworking days, however, bill rates have again come underdownward pressure, and sales of short-term securities havebeen required to keep this from getting out of hand. Thereserve impact of these sales has been more than offset bypurchases of other securities. Throughout the periodsizable purchases of bills for foreign accounts were keptoff the market by selling bills from the System Open MarketAccount.3/7/61-20- 3/7/61 -21-It is too early to tell what effect the upward revalu-ation of the Deutsche mark and the guilder will have oninternational money flows, and how these flows may affectforeign central bank activity in the Treasury bill market.There was considerable churning in international moneymarkets yesterday. We can only hope that the net resultwill be to reinforce the recent improvement in the UnitedStates balance of payments, but it is becoming increasinglyclear that international flows of funds will continue to beof great concern to us, and to monetary authorities abroad,for some time to come.These and other varied operations all evidenced thehigh degree of flexibility needed for carrying out thediverse objectives of current open market policy. So faras money conditions and short-term rates are concerned,the System's activities seem to have achieved a fairmeasure of success without causing undue disruption orconfusion in the money and securities markets.As to the special operations in longer-term issues,we have tried to keep the Committee as fully informed aspossible about our operations and the atmosphere in whichthey have been conducted through the special reports thathave been distributed to you. The initial stages of thisprogram have been carried out with reasonable success fromthe standpoint of market repercussions, which have beenremarkably mild so far in view of some of the dire pre-dictions. Dealers responded to the first purchases in aroutine manner and appear to have accepted the fact ofSystem operations in longer-term issues as something theycan learn to live with. Despite this, there has been, andstill remains, a great deal of confusion and misunderstandingwhich has not yet been dispelled.At this point what the market needs more than anythingis a chance for the furor to die down so that dealers andinvestors generally can get a better understanding of whatthe System is trying to accomplish in its operations outsidethe short-term area. A great deal has been said and writtenabout the operations, much of it misleading and ranging frominaccurate to grossly false. Some progress has been made inencouraging a more moderate attitude in the market, especiallyamong the dealers, but only with time, patient explanation,and further experience can the market arrive at a properevaluation of the newly created operating conditions. The new approach requires a great deal of flexibility atthe Desk and we have had to play pretty much by ear, gainingvaluable experience as we went along. The lack of dealerposition figures for individual dealers has been a real handi-cap and a request for them has been held in abeyance in thehope that frequency distribution data may prove to be anadequate substitute.Between now and the next meeting of the Committee, it isquite likely that the Treasury will formulate and announcethree financing operations: (1) a junior advance refunding,probably from bonds maturing in 1962 into the 6 to 7 year area(It should be pointed out that this operation is still doubt-ful and should be treated as confidential.); (2) a new cashfinancing; and (3) a rollover of April 15 bills. Although thepublicity over the System's efforts to raise short-term ratesand to lower long-term rates might be expected to reduce theadvantages of an advance refunding to the holder of the out-standing issues involved, conditions are still reasonablyfavorable for an operation of this kind and the Treasury hasbeen advised to go ahead with it. If the usual "even keel"is to be maintained during this operation, the System willprobably have to face some additional difficulties and dilemmas,particularly in the period surrounding the March 15 tax datewhen there will be considerable churning in the securities andmoney markets.At the instance of Mr. Mills, there was a brief discussion ofthe prospect of use of the direct borrowing authority by the Treasuryaround the mid-March tax date, and Messrs. Rouse and Thomas statedreasons why in their opinion it was unlikely that the Treasury wouldhave occasion to resort to that authority.Mr. Robertson stated that he would like to make certain commentsat this point. First, it seemed to him that, despite all the words thathad been used, the System had actually engaged over the past few weeks ina pegging operation in respect to the Treasury bill rate, as indicated by3/7/61-22- 3/7/61 -23-the fact that sales were made by the Account yesterday at a time whenin his opinion purchases would have been in order. He felt that Systemoperations could not be construed in any way other than an effort toput a floor under the rate on bills. Second, on two occasions duringthe past few days the Manager of the Account had engaged in swap trans-actions in the short-term area. Even recognizing the broad authoritygranted to the Manager by the Committee at the February 7 meeting, Mr.Robertson did not understand that authority for such transactions wasincluded. The minutes contained reference to the swapping of long andshort securities, but both of the operations to which he referred involvedswaps in the short-term area, which in his opinion went beyond theauthority of the Manager except if specifically authorized by theCommittee. Third, in his opinion the operations of the Desk during thepast period had not been enough in the direction of ease, especiallyduring the past week. He realized that his position favored goingfurther than the Committee consensus, but he did not feel that theoperations of the Desk had supplied enough reserves even to be in accordwith the consensus.In reply to a question, Mr. Rouse stated that obviously he woulddisagree with the comment of Mr. Robertson regarding recent operations,and that he would stand on the reports that had been rendered to theCommittee. 3/7/61 -24-Mr. Robertson then inquired whether the Committee had contemplatedswap transactions in the short-term area, to which Chairman Martin repliedthat he had thought that at the February 7 meeting the Committee more orless gave the Account Manager broad authority. The Committee was seekingempirical evidence, and if it was going to obtain that evidence the Deskwould have to engage in the necessary transactions.Mr. King noted that Mr. Robertson had referred to a peggingoperation, which term generally carried with it the connotation ofinflationary practice. In this instance, however, the effort was tomaintain a bill rate higher than might otherwise have developed throughmarket forces. If this was a pegging operation, at least it was for apurpose different than that usually suggested by the use of the term.Mr. Szymczak commented that current circumstances indicatedwhy it was not feasible for the Committee to attempt to give preciseinstructions to the Account Management in terms of day-to-day operations.Particularly in view of the diversity of current objectives, the Managermust have latitude to be guided by the feel of the market; he couldhardly be expected to operate under detailed instructions. It was notthe intent of the Committee to engage in a pegging operation or to doanything except maintain a free market. However, the Committee wasattempting to provide reserves to help the domestic economy while atthe same time endeavoring to refrain from pushing the short-term ratedown because of the problem of the balance of payments. 3/7/61 -25-Mr. Robertson said current operations appeared to constitutean effort to push the short-term rate up, and Mr. Szymczak replied thathe thought this was not necessarily the case. Although the short-termrate might go up, the System had no particular level in mind.Mr. Robertson then commented that the argument, if carried toan extreme, would suggest abolishing the Open Market Committee andauthorizing the Manager of the Open Market Account to proceed in hisown judgment and discretion.There followed comments on the statement issued by the Manager,at the Chairman's direction, on February 20, 1961, regarding the extensionof System operations into the longer-term area.Mr. Balderston stated that as one who spoke at the February 7meeting against the issuance of a statement but who urged extreme carein dealing fairly with all interested parties, he wished to say that hisview regarding the issuance of a statement changed completely betweenFebruary 7 and February 20 in the light of events that transpired. Con-sequently, he was pleased that the statement was issued. The issuance ofthe statement avoided the possible criticism that certain parties mayhave been favored by being given an opportunity not available to others.Mr. Szymczak stated that he considered the statement appropriatelyphrased and that he agreed wholeheartedly with the decision to issue it.Mr. Robertson, who had indicated at the February 7 meeting thathe would favor the issuance of a statement if, contrary to his own view, 3/7/61 -26-the Committee decided to authorize operations in the longer-term area,stated that he was pleased to observe that members who originally opposedthe issuance of a statement had since that time experienced a change ofsentiment.Chairman Martin said he would like to make this observation. Hefelt sure that it would be better for the System if it could limit itsoperations to supplying and absorbing reserves and say that its operationshad nothing to do with interest rates. However, it was not possible todo that. In talking with critics, he had found it difficult to discussthe question of pegging, which Mr. Robertson had properly brought up, inpurist terms. Some people outside the System who were opposed to the ideaof pegging nevertheless felt that the System ought to provide someguidance in the market occasionally. The Treasury was issuing quantitiesof securities from time to time which unquestionably exerted an influenceon the rate level. Therefore, while it certainly would be easier forthe System if it could say that it was simply going to supply and absorbreserves and have nothing to do with interest rates, the influence exertedby the mere supplying and absorbing of those reserves within the frameworkof the various factors at work in the market was an influence that mustbe borne in mind. He did not pretend to know the answer, but he felt itwas necessary to keep an open mind. In his view, there was no questionbut that the activities in which the System was currently engaged couldlead to pegging. The Committee should watch developments carefully andstudy all aspects of the matter. 3/7/61 -27-Thereupon, upon motion duly madeand seconded, and by unanimous vote,the open market transactions duringthe period February 7 through March 6,1961, were approved, ratified, andconfirmed.Mr. Noyes presented the following statement with regard to economicdevelopments:In the late winter and early spring of 1957, when industrialproduction and wholesale prices leveled out--while consumer pricesand business capital expenditures were continuing to set new recordssome observers chose to describe the situation as a "tired" or"fading" boom.The same adjectives might be applied to the recession in thelate winter and early spring of 1961. While it is still with us,the downturn seems to have lost momentum.As the current quarter progresses, there is an increasingprobability that gross national product will be down moderately--less than one per cent. In February, industrial production appearsto have just about held even--or perhaps declined by one point--wewill know in a few days. In any case, it seems unlikely that itwill decline further in the current month. The rate of inventoryliquidation has leveled and may actually be falling--the book valueof manufacturers' inventories declined by only $100 million inJanuary, as compared to a monthly average of $350 million in thefourth quarter. New orders held about even, after several monthsof decline. Business capital expenditure plans, as reported inthe Commerce-SEC survey released yesterday, show a decline of onlythree per cent for the year, and a small rise from the first to thesecond half. Recent surveys of consumer confidence and buyingintention have generally been interpreted as optimistic--despitesome continued weakness in expressed intentions to buy houses andhousehold durables.Department store sales have had their ups and downs, asstorms this winter have been more frequent and have seemed to hitthe weeks that were clear a year ago, but the 147 index for Februarysuggests demand is at least well maintained. The so-called leadingindicators produced a strong showing in January, as more than halfof them registered gains. Of all the current data, only thecontinuing lag in automobile sales and the persistence of a highlevel of unemployment are disturbing. The latter, of course,usually lags as business turns up, and the former is widelyattributed to the unusually severe winter in many areas. 3/7/61 -28-I might add here that we have just received the figures onunemployment for February, which are to be released this afternoon.The actual number of persons unemployed rose to 5.7 million, whichyields a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 6.8 per cent. This is0.2 per cent above January, but the same as December. Our techniciansfeel that the apparent decline in January is attributable to problemsof seasonal adjustment and that, in fact, the seasonally adjustedlevel has remained about the same for the three months.There are always many good reasons to qualify any appraisal ofeconomic prospects--but there are fewer now than usual. In termsof past experience, almost all the signs point to an increase ineconomic activity in the coming quarter. Of course, it would beuseful to know more, but there is really very little evidence, shortof an upturn itself, that one could ask for that is not already athand, to support the prognosis of a favorable shift in the balanceof economic forces.If one feels that monetary policy should attempt to anticipatechanges in business, either for the better or the worse--then thepresent situation might properly be interpreted as calling for ashift in policy. As I have just suggested, it is unlikely that weshall have any more convincing evidence than we have now that weare approaching a turning point until after the turn has in factoccurred.Having said this much, I should like to go a little further,to add that it does not seem to me that the situation I havereported calls for any lessening of the degree of ease presentlyprevailing in credit markets. While some progress has been madethere is less liquidity than at the end of other postwar recessionsand there is more idle manpower and more idle capacity. The riskof a runaway boom that would take up the slack in the economy andgenerate serious inflationary pressure quickly seems very smallindeed.The situation in none of the more volatile areas of expenditure--inventory accumulation, business capital outlays, residential con-struction, or consumer durable goods purchases--seems conducive tothe early generation of excessive demands on available resources.Governmental expenditures--Federal, State and local--will undoubtedlyincrease, but the magnitude of the increase in the months immediatelyahead will be moderate. The danger from this source, if a danger infact develops, will come later.In brief, developments in the last four weeks appear to confirm,rather than modify, the conclusion presented at the last meetingthat we shall see some further decline in the current quarter,followed, in all likelihood, by a gradual recovery. Mr. Thomas presented the following statement on the creditsituation:In February short-term interest rates tended to rise, whilelong-term interest rates declined. Stock prices rose to new highlevels on exceptionally active trading. Bank reserve positionswere somewhat tighter than they had been in January, although inthe latter part of the month the persistence of float at a higherlevel than usual served to increase free reserves at least temporarily.Total loans and investments of city banks, which declined much lessthan usual in January, fluctuated rather widely in February, with nopronounced trend. The seasonally adjusted money supply, which increasedconsiderably during January, was at a higher level in February then atany time in over a year, but showed little further growth in the courseof the month.Diverse movements of interest rates in February may no doubt beattributed to some extent to Federal Reserve operations and to theeffects on market participants of System and Administration statementsas to aims. There were other factors, however, some of which may betransitory. In the short-term area, for example, dealers have con-siderably reduced their positions in Treasury bills from the largeholdings accumulated in December and early January. City bank holdingsof bills, which had previously increased, were also reduced in February.With some reduction in reserve availability in the first halfof the month, many member banks needed to borrow in the Federalfunds market and occasionally at the Reserve Banks. The discountrate of 3 per cent no doubt serves to prevent much decline in billrates. Even during the extremely easy reserve periods of 1954 and1958 the 3-month bill rate generally remained within 3/4 of apercentage point below the discount rate. With similar amounts offree reserves, bill rates were much lower than they are nowbecause the discount rate was lower.The further decline in long-term rates may be attributed inpart to seasonal factors. Yields on long-term bonds by eachmajor issuer group, after declining in the first eight months oflast year, rose contra-seasonally from August until December.Declines in these yields from December to the last half of Februaryappear to have been a little less than the usual seasonal decrease.The largest decline occurred in corporate bonds, and this may bedue in part to the small volume of new issues in this area. Yieldson State and local government bonds have remained relatively firm,reflecting a moderately large volume of new issues and theaccumulation of unsold offerings in dealers' inventories. 3/7/61It may be noted that, contrary to a popular impression, thedecline in yields on long-term U.S. Government bonds from the peakreached in January 1960 has been approximately as large as thedeclines from previous peaks to lows in the two previous recessions.Also, the spread between yields on 3-month Treasury bills and theaverage yield on long-term Treasury bonds has widened less in thepast year than it did in the 1957-58 decline in interest rates. Inother words, long-term yields have declined as much as bill yieldsrelative to the previous period of decline.Total loans and investments at city banks, following a lessthan seasonal decline in January and a substantial increase in theweek of February 1, which was due largely to the special Searstransaction, showed little net change in the four weeks endingMarch 1 (as indicated by partial data for the latest date).Ordinarily some decline occurs in February. There have beenrather wide variations in recent weeks. Increases in loans tobusiness and to sales finance companies during February wereroughly in accord with seasonal trends. Loans to dealers inGovernment securities, which had been rather large in January,declined in February. Holdings of Government securities alsodeclined, but holdings of other securities showed a sizableincrease. City bank holdings of Treasury bills were reduced.Reflecting in part the effect of the Treasury refunding operationsand the approach to maturity of outstanding issues, the banks'holdings of certificates also declined, but their holdings of notesand bonds maturing within one year increased by almost as much asthe decrease in bills and certificates. Holdings of notes andbonds maturing in over a year continued to decline, notwithstandingthe shift in the maturity of the new issue.Demand deposits adjusted at city banks declined by aboutthe usual seasonal amount in February, after declining lessthan seasonally in January. Time deposits continued to showa greater than seasonal increase. U.S. Government depositsalso increased substantially. The daily average, seasonallyadjusted money supply continued to increase in the first halfof February and preliminary data indicate the possibility of aslightly higher average for the second half of February--thehighest level in over a year. Most of the recent increase,however, had already been attained by early February. Weeklydata indicate little further growth since that time.The recent leveling out of monetary growth is reflectedin the figures for member bank required reserves relative toprojections on the basis of the usual seasonal pattern. Afterdeclining substantially less than usual through the week ofFebruary 1, changes in required reserves fell below the pro-jected levels during the next three weeks, but then rose,according to preliminary data, in the week of March 1.-30- 3/7/61 -31-Total reserves were maintained in the three weeks endingFebruary 22, in part through a somewhat larger volume ofmember bank borrowing than had recently been customary, andwere kept up in the week of March 1 primarily by the continu-ation of float at a higher level than expected. All of thesedifferences, however, were too small to be of any greatsignificance. If they have any particular import, it is thatthere was little or no further monetary expansion after thebeginning of February.In this current statement week and the next, some $500million of additional reserves will need to be supplied in orderto meet current needs and maintain free reserves at close to$600 million. The experience of the last two months indicatesthat a free reserve level of over $600 million is conducive tocredit expansion, while a level below $500 million may not be.Projections of reserve needs around the middle of March areunreliable because of variations in the timing of large taxpayments and float. In any event liquidity needs are substantialat that time and reserves should be abundantly available. Sub-stantial amounts will probably be supplied through the midmonthincrease in float, and System operations, after supplyingreserves in the first half of the month, might be reversedsomewhat to absorb some reserves in the last half.To meet seasonal needs, only moderate increases in theFederal Reserve portfolio will be needed on balance during thesecond quarter of the year, with the usual intramonthvariations. These estimates allow for a continued gold drainof $25 million a week; if this should not develop, Systemaction to supply reserves may need to be negligible except forthe intramonth operations. To foster credit growth, however,an additional $50 million or more a month might be needed.Demands in credit markets in the months ahead might beexpected to require more bank reserves than are allowed for inthese projections. As indicated in the memorandum on theTreasury cash outlook given to the Committee, even withmoderate economic recovery Treasury borrowing needs will be muchlarger during the remainder of this year than they were lastyear, and those during the last six-months may be as much as$9 or $10 billion, exceeding borrowings in the correspondingperiods of 1958 and 1959.In order to indicate the possible nature and magnitude ofdemands on the credit system, the Board's staff has made someprojections of sources and uses of credit on the basis ofstated assumptions as to economic recovery. Net borrowingby State and local governments is likely to increase and to be 3/7/61 -32-larger this year than in any previous year. The increase inhome mortgages is now running less than in 1959 and 1960 butmight be expected to increase in the last half of the year.Corporate borrowing--both at long- and short-term--willprobably continue to be smaller than in other recent years.Total expansion of all types of credit in 1961, undersuch assumptions, would be similar in amount to 1960 and 1957,but less than in 1955, 1958, and 1959. The commercial bankingsystem will probably be called upon to supply a somewhat largerportion of these credit needs this year than last, principallythrough additions to holdings of securities, and more than inany other year except 1958. The expansion in bank creditmay occur with only a moderate increase in loans. Suchexpansion in bank credit would be needed to provide for aresumption of expansion in the money supply, which showedlittle growth in 1959 and 1960. In addition, time depositsat commercial banks will probably continue to increase atclose to last year's rate. Consumers may be expected toincrease their additions to deposit-type assets, as well astheir claims on insurance and pension reserves, but mightreduce their holdings of securities. Liquid assets ofcorporations, which declined last year, might be expected toincrease moderately this year in holdings both of cash balancesand of Government securities.This pattern of financial development would call foran increase in bank reserves of well over half a billiondollars in the course of the year--or an average of about$50 million a month in excess of usual seasonal needs.These reserves would need to be supplied by Federal Reservecredit, and any gold outflow would necessitate additionalamounts of Federal Reserve credit. Hence, to financeeconomic recovery the System should supply somewhat morereserves than the usual seasonal needs. If the projectedcredit demands develop, the availability of reserves insuch amounts would not cause a decline in interest rates,but would be needed to prevent too sharp an increase.In reply to a question by Mr. Mills regarding the weight thatshould properly be given to seasonal interest rate movements as anelement of economic analysis, Mr. Thomas agreed that such data mustbe studied carefully, that they represented merely a rough indication 3/7/61 -33-of the nature of the situation, and that the broad movements overlonger periods tended to be more accurate guides.Mr. Marget then presented the following statement on inter-national financial developments:Last Saturday the German government announced an appreci-ation of the mark. This was closely followed by a comparableannouncement by the Netherlands government with respect to theguilder. According to one line of thinking which has becomefairly widespread, these actions should be regarded as eventsof very great importance for the United States balance ofpayments. For, according to this thinking, the deficit inthe United States balance of payments has not only been--as,in a sense, every dificit must be--a reflection of thesurplus in the balance of payments of certain other countries,of which Germany was the most notable, but has been theresult basically of a wrong set of foreign exchange rates.In particular, the German over-all surplus was alleged tobe the result of an undervaluation of the mark. Correctthat undervaluation and the German surplus would disappear,and with it the United States deficit, and therefore allthe balance-of-payments problems of the United States.It would be pleasant to believe that the matter is assimple as this. Unfortunately it is not. It might be well,therefore, to review the argument of those who, while theyinsisted that the decision with respect to the foreignexchange rate of the mark was basically one for the Germansthemselves to make, and while they did not regard the prospectof an appreciation of the mark as necessarily portendingdisaster, nevertheless refused to accept the suggestionthat it was in this direction that we must seek salvationof the international payments system in general, and of theUnited States balance of payments in particular.In the first place, it was known that the extent of thesupposed "under-valuation" of the mark, as calculated by thoseGermans who themselves favored an appreciation of the mark,was very small--around 5 per cent, according to these Germansthemselves. And in fact the announced appreciation has beenof this order. Given any reasonable degree of flexibility inprofit margins, it is difficult to believe that a change ofthis magnitude will so seriously affect the competitivenessof German industry as to destroy the German surplus at onestroke. On the other hand, it will be interesting to see 3/7/61 -34-what effect the announcement of this small degree of appreci-ation will have on those movements of capital which have beenso largely affected, in recent years, by expectations of anappreciation of the mark. If the speculative fraternitybecomes convinced that this is the final answer on the questionof the appreciation of the mark, then perhaps we shall havepeace in this area for a while, and we may even see somereflow to the United States of funds that went abroad on theexpectation of a German appreciation. But if the smallnessof the degree of appreciation convinces the speculators thatit can be regarded only as a first instalment on a much largerdegree of exchange adjustment, it is anything but clear thatwe shall have the peace that we have been seeking in thisfield.It must be said, however, that, if the step was to be takenat all, it was well to take it at this time, when our newAdministration's repeated statements of its determination todefend the dollar at its present parity have apparently servedto reestablish confidence in our currency. For one of the dangersinherent in an emphasis upon the necessity for an appreciation ofthe currency of surplus countries is that it encourages an obviouscounter-argument that could have very disconcerting consequences:namely, that if it is the exchange rate that is at fault, it is,after all, just as reasonable to insist that the deficit countriescorrect the situation by depreciating their exchange ratesas it is to insist that the surplus countries appreciate theirs.It may very well happen, indeed, in the days immediatelyahead of us, that the very smallness of the degree of appreci-ation of the mark may lead speculators to precisely this viewwith respect to the exchange rate of the British pound, andthereby intensify speculative pressure on the pound considerablybeyond what was to have been expected in any event as theresult of the clear weaknesses in the basic position of sterling,which have until very recently been masked by the very capitalmovements that have masked the undeniable improvement in thebasic balance-of-payments position of the United States. It isto be hoped that this improvement in our basic position, togetherwith the unequivocal commitments of our new Administration, mayspare the United States a similar back-lash of speculativesentiment consequent upon the action by the German and Dutchauthorities; but on this we shall have to wait and see.The second reason why some have felt that it was wrong toput all emphasis upon the desirability of appreciating the mark,in particular, as a way of solving the balance-of-paymentsproblems of the United States is really independent of the extent 3/7/61 -35-of the appreciation involved. For there is the further issueof the sharing of burdens by the Western alliance: in thefields of development assistance, on the one hand, and acontribution to the joint military effort, on the other.The Germans, to be sure--and, for that matter, a very con-siderable proportion of the Western financial community,including its central bankers--have persistently denied thatthere is any connection whatever between a country's balance-of-payments position and its ability to contribute to inter-national efforts in the field of development assistance andjoint defense. I cannot take the time here to go over therelevant arguments in detail. But surely one thing iscertain: and this is that if a country is to provide anet amount of development assistance, for example, it musthave a surplus in its balance of payments. Otherwise therewould be nothing to transfer as assistance to the recipientcountries. The difficulty with Germany, in this respect,was not that it had a balance-of-payments surplus, a goodpart of which was going to the less-developed countries;the difficulty was that it had not shown itself willing tofinance that surplus, with the result that it acquired avery large amount of monetary reserves from countries which,in one way or another, were financing this developmentassistance. If, now, the effect of an appreciation of themark were to destroy the German suprlus, as some commentatorshave suggested is likely to be the case, we should still beleft to face the problem of who is going to provide thedevelopment assistance and the means for military expendituresabroad, which certainly makes part of our balance-of-paymentsproblem. It is for this reason that the United StatesGovernment, while it has maintained an attitude of neutralityon the subject of the advisability of an appreciation of themark per se, has made it very clear that it does not regardan appreciation of the mark as in any sense a substitute forthose measures, in the field of development assistance andmilitary burden-sharing, which it regards as reasonable toexpect from Germany as a member of the Western alliance.If Germany does not take the necessary measures in these twofields, the additional burdens will fall upon us; and noamount of sophistication can get around the fact that theseadditional burdens would seriously aggravate our balance-of-payments problem.And there is a final, and decisive, reason why it wouldbe extremely unwise to rely for the solution of our ownbalance-of-payments problem wholly upon the actions of othergovernments, in the field of exchange-rate policy or in any 3/7/61 -36-other field. It is always fair to ask of surplus countriesthat they follow, in the field of trade and aid, those policieswhich are characterized collectively as "good creditor policies."But to go beyond this, and to insist, or imply, that nothingcan be done by the deficit countries to get their own inter-national accounts in balance and keep them in balance is aposition whose inherent absurdity is matched only by itspossibilities for a fatal weakening of moral fiber in thefield of national policy-making. We have indeed made greatprogress toward a balancing of our international accountssince the low point of the spring of 1959; and our own policyactions have undoubtedly played a role in the achieving ofthat progress. If this slight adjustment of the German andDutch exchange rates turns out, without adverse consequencesotherwise, to help along the process of adjustment in our basicposition, well and good; but it will still be true that thefuture of the United States balance of payments, and all thathangs on its, will depend fundamentally upon our own actions:and specifically, and prosaically, on the degree of successwe attain in pursuing those policies, in all fields, which willkeep us competitive in the markets of the world and here athome.Mr. Hayes presented the following statement of his views on thebusiness outlook and credit policy:Economic activity has continued to decline moderately, asindicated by January statistics and fragmentary data for February.There is no sign of a speed-up in the recession. On the otherhand, although the decline in some series slowed and there wasan actual upturn in others, this evidence is too fragmentary towarrant a judgment that the bottom has been reached. Someindications of improvement in February, as in department storeand automobile sales, may have been attributable largely to theweather. Consumer buying intentions point to a more favorableoutlook than could be supported by current statistics, and like-wise business sentiment seems more buoyant than actual businessspending. There is no way of knowing whether inventory liqui-dation has run its course. On the one hand, manufacturers haveapparently stopped liquidating purchased materials and goods inprocess. However, the inventory position of finished goods (bothmanufacturers' and retail) remains rather heavy.Continuing stability in commodity prices has contrasted withthe considerable rise in stock prices. The latter developmentmay not be entirely a healthy one and may perhaps reflect fears 3/7/61 -37-of future inflation as much as optimism on the business outlook.Nevertheless, the stock price rise in itself probably constitutesa stimulus to greater consumer and business spending.The latest statistics on bank credit and bank reserves areagain encouraging. Total loans and investments at weekly reportingmember banks recorded a sizable gain in February--a much strongershowing than in most recent years--and the comparison is favorableeven if we adjust for the inclusion in February figures of a $1.1billion sale of receivables by Sears Roebuck to the company'sbanks. The larger New York banks generally expect their loansto hold up well or to rise somewhat in the coming months, incontrast with declines during the corresponding period of 1958.Total reserves of all member banks, on a seasonally adjustedbasis, rose substantially in February to surpass the 1960 highset in November (the gain above the April 1960 low being at anannual rate of 6 per cent); and required reserves, adjusted,reached a record high in February.There is also considerable cause for gratification inrecent developments having to do with the dollar and the balanceof payments. I am thinking of such items as the sharp reductionin the gold outflow, the drying up of demand and sharp pricedrop in the London gold market, and the preliminary statisticspointing to the virtual cessation of the outward flow of short-term capital in January and February. However, this improvementis threatened by the atmosphere of uncertainty following theGerman and Dutch revaluations, and it could easily be upset byany one of a variety of developments casting doubt on ourwillingness and ability to follow through on the statements andactions responsible for the improvement.Even though the business outlook is not especiallyencouraging, the fact that the trend is no worse than in thepast few months and that we may even be seeing some faintsigns pointing to recovery suggests that we can afford tocontinue about the same policy we have been following, withoutany effort to ease further. On the other hand, the banks shouldcontinue to be given sufficient reserves to meet all reasonabledemands--and incidentally, with the likelihood of continuingserious unemployment even after an uptrend gets well under way,it would seem appropriate to contemplate continuing a relativelyeasy policy for a longer period than may have been desirablein earlier post-war business recoveries.Since we have made only a beginning (if a rather gratifyingone) toward remedying our balance-of-payments position and theproblem of confidence in the dollar, the level of short-terminterest rates must continue to be a matter of primary concernto the Committee. It seems to me that policy in the next threeweeks should be directed mainly to preventing any decline in 3/7/61 -38-bill rates and preferably to encouraging some further rise.Subject to this overriding objective, I would hope the Managerwould try to preserve about the same degree of ease in the marketas has prevailed in the past few weeks, again as measured by thefeel of the market rather than by any particular level of freereserves. If, as seems quite possible, it proves necessary tolet free reserves fall well below their recent level in orderto keep bill rates from going lower, I would be quite preparedto see this happen. It is hard to predict just what will berequired in the way of open market operations, since there willbe important cross-currents influencing market rates, includingthe usual seasonal dividend and tax pressures around the middleof the month and the greater scarcity of bills which will followredemption of the March tax bills. The Manager may be able tomoderate downward pressures on bill rates by spreading purchasesalong the maturity spectrum, thus making good use of the greaterflexibility which the Committee has authorized him to exercise.At the same time I hope that the coming three weeks willprovide a further opportunity for cautious probing with respectto the possibilities for nudging longer-term rates in a downwarddirection. The desirability of lower rates to help stimulatethe economy is no less now than it has been. I am very gladthat the Manager has moved with such care and moderation in thisprogram, and I have no dobut [sic] that he will continue to do so. Ithink the System has made a good start toward demonstrating thatit can operate in intermediate and longer-term governments in amore or less "routine" fashion, without upsetting the market orentrapping itself in any sort of pegging operation. But it isobvious that much more time and much more testing will be neededbefore the policies we have adopted can be said to have had afair trial--and I believe the Committee agrees that a fair trialis what we must seek, now that we have set our course.Incidentally, I feel strongly that many of the press commentson the new policy have been ill-informed and have been critical onthe basis of gross misinterpretation of our intentions. I wouldhope that all parts of the System would share in the importantjob of education that must be done if we are to minimize thiscritical attitude and provide a reasonably objective atmospherein which to carry out our probing operations. Furthermore, Ithink it is essential, if our operations outside the short-termarea are to make the maximum possible contribution to the economy,that the authorization for these operations be as broad aspossible. To allow the public to think that they have beenauthorized merely as a "temporary aberration" would be to hobbletheir effectiveness from the start, as I believe was explicitlyrecognized at our last meeting. 3/7/61 -39-As for the discount rate and the directive, there appearsto be no reason to consider a change at this time.Mr. Johns reported that within the St. Louis Reserve Bank therewas some feeling that the forces of economic contraction might be losingsome of their energy and that possibly a turnaround in economic activitymight be imminent. He expressed the hope that it would be possible forthe Committee to continue, as it had been doing recently in modest degree,to encourage monetary expansion. In saying this, he wished to emphasizethat he was speaking of expansion in most modest terms; he was notadvocating that the Committee proceed recklessly and in terms of largeincrements. He would hope, of course, that this could be accomplishedwithin the interest rate objectives the Committee had adopted, and hewas encouraged to believe that this might be possible.Mr. Bryan stated that at a briefing session last Friday the staffof the Atlanta Bank was able to point out a few Sixth District economicseries that had actually turned upward, and there were several others wherethe rate of change downward had slowed markedly. There appeared to be aprevailing note of optimism on the part of the staff and, except for theState of Florida, this note of optimism seemed to be fairly general though-out the District. He shared the staff's feeling that the economy might bebottoming out, or at least that there was no great danger that the recessionwould turn into an accelerating slide.Turning to policy, Mr. Bryan indicated that, like Mr. Johns, hewould favor a continued modest encouragement of monetary expansion. He 3/7/61 -40-did not believe that at this stage there was any danger of inducinginflation by a very modest monetary expansion. In his view, theCommittee's prime concern should not be the short-term rate, but ratherthe encouragement of economic recovery. The short-term rate was animportant factor, but it should be of secondary concern. If the Com-mittee should get hypnotized by the short-term rate, it might easily fallinto errors of policy.Mr. Bopp stated that, along with the fragmentary glimmerings ofoptimism appearing on the national scene, there were a few hopeful signsin the Third District. Steel production had increased a little in recentweeks and department store sales had improved somewhat, as had freightcar loadings. While unemployment claims were still high, they indicatedthat unemployment might not be as severe as in 1958.In commenting on the monetary situation, Mr. Bopp said thatdespite decreases in bank credit and deposits since the beginning of theyear, bank data in the District still reflected the influence of creditease. The declines seemed not to be as pronounced as might be expected atthis time of year. Reserve city banks had begun borrowing again on asmall scale and country banks continued to borrow. One reason for thelatter was that State funds for fourth class school districts had beensomewhat delayed and school authorities were forced to borrow from theirlocal banks.Mr. Bopp expressed the view that the slight promise of improvementin the economy was not adequate to support any change in the over-all 3/7/61 -41-degree of ease. Attention should continue to be focused on open marketoperations in maturities beyond the short-term area. These had beenhandled skillfully and the results thus far were gratifying. Even thisearly in the game, however, it might be well to caution against expectingtoo much. Some of the conditions under which the operations were beingconducted were unfavorable, and the fact that they were necessarilyexperimental made it more difficult to achieve the desired results. Themarket clearly had a "show me" attitude. A second disadvantage was thestage of the cycle in which the experiment had been begun. If it turnedout that the operations had a limited effect in lowering long-term rates,this might not necessarily indicate that similar operations could not bemore successful in an earlier phase of recession when expectations oflower rates were greater and when, in fact, lower long-term rates mightbe more effective in stimulating the economy.In general, Mr. Bopp said, he would continue the present degreeof ease.Mr. Fulton reported that in the Fourth District insured unemploy-ment had increased more than seasonally and was widespread. Theunemployment situation was reflected in the number of cities in theDistrict, both large and small, that had been classified as areas ofsubstantial labor surplus. Coal production had edged down to an all-timelow, and electric power output was substantially below a year ago. Autosales declined in January, and it seemed there was no pick-up in February. 3/7/61 -42-While department store sales in the past two weeks had been above theyear-ago levels, for the year to date sales were 3 per cent under a yearago.The steel industry, Mr. Fulton said, continued in the doldrums.Orders from the automotive industry were almost nonexistent, and thoseorders already on the books were being pushed back for delivery at somelater date. However, some orders from other users of steel had been comingin on an emergency basis. If the steel they wanted was on the dock, a salewas made; if not, they went elsewhere. Inventories of steel users apparentlywere being kept at minimum levels, and their purchases of steel seemed toreflect that situation rather than any pickup in orders. Auto productionwas of course at a considerably depressed rate; the dealers were caught ina profit squeeze, with too much inventory for them to move successfully.The current feeling in the steel industry was that the automobile situationwould not improve to any great extent until the fourth quarter of the year,when new models might give a stimulus to sales. The profit squeezecontinued to be a severe problem in many industries, particularly in thesteel industry, which had another contractual wage increase coming up inOctober. While they were able to absorb the increase last December, theydid not think they could do so next time.In summary, Mr. Fulton said, the situation in the Fourth Districtwas far from bright. Perhaps the most optimistic factor was that althoughcapital spending plans were somewhat less in dollar amount than last year, 3/7/61 43-there had been few cut-backs in the planned expenditures. Also, inventoriesof heavy finished goods had been reduced somewhat.In terms of policy, Mr. Fulton indicated that he would favor acontinuation of the degree of ease that had prevailed recently. He washopeful that the degree of ease would not be reduced precipitantly, thusdepriving the market of funds. He continued to hope that the directivewould be changed to provide for fostering "recovery" rather than "sustain-able growth."Mr. King said it was tempting to speculate on exactly what stageof the cycle the economy was in at the present time. However, this wasclearly not a time to make any significant change in System policy. Aftercommenting on the unemployment figures and the significance he attached tothem, Mr. King said it was quite evident that economic recovery was not yetin progress. Consequently, from the point of view of monetary policy hesaw little point in trying to make a case that the recession was bottomingout or that a turnaround might be near. Concerning the bill rate, he hadexpressed the view in the past that the System could get quite a bit ofmileage out of a bill rate increase, and he now felt that the System hadgotten considerable mileage out of the rise of the bill rate that occurred.As to the experimentation in longer-term securities that the Committeeauthorized on February 7, he wished to say for the record that he would haveconcurred in that action had he been present at that meeting. If theCommittee was going to give the experiment a fair chance to succeed, he felt 3/7/61 -44-it would be working at odds with the objective of lower long-term rates ifan effort was made to push short-term rates higher. He did not believe itwas possible to control the bill in minute degree, but he would besatisfied with a rate in the range of 2.25 to 2.50 per cent. As he saw it,there was little to be gained from any pressure to push the bill ratehigher than it now was, and a rising bill rate might work against any dropin longer-term rates. There was a question in his mind as to whether anysubstantial results would be obtained from the experimentation in thelonger-term area. However, the experiment was being conducted in a spiritof trying to do whatever was possible to help the recovery of the economy.To give it a fair chance, he thought there was a basis for not pushingshort-term rates up further at the present time. He saw no reason for achange in the discount rate. As to free reserves, they seemed likely torange quite widely, and he had reached a stage in his thinking where heconsidered it rather futile to try to give a target figure at this particu-lar time.Mr. Shepardson indicated that he would agree generally with thestaff appraisal of the present state of the economy. Further, since itwas not possible to tell just when an upturn might come, it seemed entirelyappropriate to continue the present degree of ease. He agreed with thesuggestion that there should be some provision for growth, within reasonablebounds, as called for by the directive. If the current degree of easecould be fully maintained, with some slight provision for growth, it 3/7/61 -45-appeared to him that this would be consistent with the stated objective.The short-term rate was still a factor to be considered. However, byusing the new approach authorized by the Committee, it might be that bothobjectives, that is, monetary expansion and maintenance of the bill rate,could be achieved.Mr. Robertson said that he agreed generally with the views expressedby Messrs. Johns and Bryan. It was his feeling that monetary policy had notbeen making the contribution to recovery of which it was capable because ofthe emphasis placed on the bill rate. He found himself even less convincedthan at previous meetings as to the necessity of holding up the bill rate.More important than that, however, was the failure of the Committee toprovide adequate reserves to enable the economy to turn in an upwarddirection. He was pleased at the indications of a possible turn-aroundin the economy, but this was no time to relax, and he would increase theavailability of reserves. He would shoot at free reserves in the rangeof $650 to $750 million; if the figure got as high as $750 million, hewould not be concerned, in fact rather pleased. As far as the bill ratewas concerned, it was time for the Committee to get away from using itas the criterion for open market policy. If the level of free reserveshe had mentioned was maintained and the bill rate dropped, he would notbe concerned.Mr. Mills expressed the opinion that Mr. Marget's statement on theposition of the United States in international affairs had provided a guide 3/7/61 -46-to the Committee's thinking for some time ahead. He (Mr. Mills) continuedto believe that the international financial situation was the marginalfactor on which the Committee should base its policy formulation. Althoughhe realized he was decidedly in the minority, he felt that the reservesituation in the reserve weeks of February 1, 8, and 15, when the level ofpositive free reserves was modestly below $500 million, was appropriate tothe international problem. Also, in his opinion a Treasury bill rate whichranged to 2-1/2 per cent was consistent with the balance-of-paymentsposition, a problem with which the Federal Reserve still must contend. Ashe saw it, a policy that would produce a level of positive free reserves ofaround $500 million would be more desirable than an injection of reservesto the point of raising the level of free reserves to $600 or $700 million.There was, of course, the unresolved question as to whether a $500 millionlevel of free reserves was distorted by lack of familiarity and experiencewith the effects of taking vault cash into required reserves. However,experience of earlier years indicated that the placing of such a volume ofreserves consistently at the disposal of the commercial banking system hadbeen adequate to permit expansion of credit at times when such expansionwas sought.Mr. Mills then suggested that the Committee should keep in mind animportant fact brought out by Mr. Thomas. Beginning around mid-year theposition of the Treasury would fall increasingly into deficit, which wouldinvolve more frequent recourse to the market for new cash. When that 3/7/61 -47-occurred, presumably the Federal Reserve System would have to make allowancefor the Treasury borrowing through the provision of reserves. If at suchtime the volume of free reserves was already at an extravagant level inrelation to economic conditions, the Federal Reserve would only compound itsdifficulties by overloading the banking system with superfluous reserves.As he had indicated, Mr. Mills said, he believed a somewhat lowerlevel of free reserves would be consistent with the kind of policy thatshould guide the Committee at this juncture in the light of internationalevents, and also because such a reserve position should produce a reasonablyhigh level of Treasury bill rates. If there was a lesser volume of reservesavailable in the financial community, this might mean that the impact ofSystem operations in the intermediate and longer-term sectors of theGovernment securities market would be sharper than if such operations wereundertaken within the context of a scheme of bill rates lower than thoseexperienced in recent weeks.Mr. Wayne reported that a spot check in the Fifth District indicateda feeling of optimism for the first time in nearly a year, but the optimismappeared to exceed the statistical support. There was some encouragementin the chemical industry and in the new orders received by the furnitureindustry. The textile industry, on the other hand, was somewhat disturbedabout the effect of foreign competition on its profit margins. Mortgagemoney appeared plentiful and rates were under considerable pressure.However, lenders did not expect to let mortgage rates ease off as yet, 3/7/61 -48-preferring to wait and see what would develop. Bankers did not appearsurprised by the decision of the Open Market Committee to authorizeoperations in longer-term securities. They were displaying interest inthe decision of New York City banks to offer negotiable time certificatesof deposit to corporations, and there was some indication that FifthDistrict banks might move in the same direction.Mr. Wayne went on to say that it would be premature to maintainthere was any clear evidence that the recession had bottomed out. Never-theless, all of the evidence that was available seemed to indicate that ifthe economy had not bottomed out, it was very close to that point. In hisview, there would be no strong reason to increase the degree of ease thathad existed for the past several weeks. At the same time, he concurred inthe view that because of the amount of unused resources and the volume ofunemployment, the Committee might be able to continue the present degree oease somewhat longer than would otherwise be the case. He saw little dangof inflation. In his opinion the Desk had handled operations over the passeveral weeks with skill, and he would be reluctant to set specific targetfor open market operations during the next three weeks. However, he sawno reason to change the present degree of ease, the policy directive, orthe discount rate.Mr. Clay said there were no economic developments in the TenthDistrict on which it seemed necessary to report. As to the nationalpicture, encouragement could be derived from the fact that the downward 3/7/61 -49-movement appeared not to be cumulative, and there appeared to be someslight evidence that the downward movement was stopping. On the otherhand, it was still not possible to tell when an upward movement mightbegin. Perhaps a more important factor was the unusually high level ofunemployment and unused resources. These levels were higher than mightbe expected from the standpoint of cyclical considerations, and theymight prove to be intractable even at the time of a cyclical upturn.Mr. Clay expressed the view that monetary policy should continueto be directed toward encouraging an expansion of economic activity. Inview of the international situation, he would not like to see short-termrates decline. Within the limitations of that statement, however, he feltthat a continuing effort should be made to squeeze longer-term rates down-ward.Mr. Allen reported that business in the Seventh District supportedthe topic sentence in the staff's highlight summary to the effect thatrecessionary forces appeared to have lost strength. The steel operatingindex at the end of February had risen to 93 in the Chicago area and to 90in Detroit. That compared with 85 for the nation, which was also an improve-ment over the recent past. For the four weeks ended February 25, departmentstore sales in the District were a little higher than last year, as wasthe case for the nation. The automobile business, while poor compared withother years, improved as February progressed, and seasonal factors shouldbring further improvement. The feeling in Detroit was that February would 3/7/61 -50-turn out to be the low sales month of the year. Production for the firstquarter was likely to be only 1.2 million units, and current estimates forthe remaining three quarters were 1.3, 1.0, and 1.5 million, making 5.0million for the year, the poorest showing since 1958.Bank loans showed signs of strength in February, Mr. Allen said,with total loans of Seventh District weekly reporting banks increasingabout $100 million in the first three weeks of the month, almost as much asin the same period last year. To meet the loan demand and also a depositdecline of $200 million, District reporting banks sold Governmentsecurities, both short- and longer-term. Total holdings of Governmentsof over one year maturity declined, despite substantial acquisition of thenew 3-1/4 per cent notes on February 15. The temporary pressures onreserves in the week of that financing had abated, and borrowing at thediscount window dropped to a negligible level by the end of the month.Although the larger Chicago banks had acquired a substantial amount ofTreasury bills in anticipation of the April 1 tax date and still showeda basic deficit, they had improved their position by sales of securitiesand did not use the discount window in the latest statement week.Turning to policy, Mr. Alien commented that the apparent abatementof recessionary forces was most welcome and might well be followed by anincrease in business activity. However, there was not enough evidence ofthe latter to suggest that a change in the direction of monetary policy wasin order. Accordingly, he would not change the discount rate, the directive,or the degree of ease, which had been more or less constant for some time. 3/7/61 -51-Mr. Deming stated that, for the most part, economic developmentsin the Ninth District during the past four weeks were similar to thosein the nation, and represented a continuation of the developments he hadreported previously. However, one exception in the District pictureshould be noted: loan demand currently was significantly stronger thanhad been anticipated. In February, city bank loans turned up rathersharply. This upward movement, due only partly to participation in theSears financing, almost completely reversed the January experience andexpectations. Taking the two months together, loans were down seasonally,but not much, and not much more than in the same period last year. Depositsalso were down seasonally, but not much and far less than last year.Taking loan and deposit movements together, it could be said that thetrend toward greater bank liquidity continued, but at a substantiallyreduced rate, and that the level of liquidity was not particularly high.With respect to credit policy, Mr. Deming suggested continuationof about the present degree of ease, perhaps shading that a bit by havingany deviations on the side of ease rather than on the side of tightness.At the same time, he would continue to use the short-term rate as a generalguide line and direct operations in such a way as to keep it from fallingin significant degree. He saw no need to change the directive or discountrate at this time.Mr. Swan stated that Twelfth District developments had not beenmarkedly dissimilar from developments in the country generally. There had 3/7/61 -52-been some improvement in the seasonally adjusted rate of unemployment inthe three Coastal States during January, and the increase in unemploymentcompensation claims in California in the first three weeks of Februarywere somewhat less than in other recent years. Also, there had been aslight improvement in the rate of steel output, and construction contractawards were up markedly in January. On the other hand, unemploymentcontinued at a high absolute level. Lumber production, production ofdurables, and automobile sales were still weak. There had been some easingin the mortgage market, reflecting primarily an increased availability offunds, but with only scattered indications of actual rate reductions. Someanalysts had indicated that the increased availability of funds mightbe contributing to an improvement in the market for existing houses andthere had been some increase in FHA and VA applications for that type offinancing. However, little or no effect was seen from the standpoint ofthe market for new houses or plans of builders for the next few months.Mr. Swan said there were no particular indications as yet of anyincrease in the current demand for bank loans. In the past couple ofweeks, the position of major District banks in the Federal funds marketwas roughly in balance between purchases and sales. There had beenvirtually no borrowing from the Federal Reserve Bank during the past 10days or two weeks.As to policy, Mr. Swan said he had no particular change to suggestin view of the program on which the Committee had now embarked. He felt 3/7/61 -53-that the Desk had done well during the past couple of weeks, but at thesame time he would like to express the view that one should not be carriedaway by any appearance of success. Even with the forecast of a possibleupturn of the domestic economy, the current domestic situation--if it werepossible to concentrate solely on that--obviously argued for more ease.Even if a recovery should begin there would be quite a long way to go.While he agreed that the Federal Reserve must still concern itself withthe short-term rate, he had some apprehension about the definition ofundue pressure. He did not feel that any pressure that might tend to moveshort-term rates down from whatever level they might reach was necessarily"undue" pressure. To put it another way, he had the feeling that whateversignificance may have been ascribed to a rate of 2-1/4 per cent severalweeks ago was now being ascribed to a rate of 2-1/2 per cent, and hewould not like to see a continuation in that direction. It was difficultto quantify this point of view, but he agreed with those who had suggestedthat the Federal Reserve should encourage monetary expansion as much aspossible in the present circumstances. He was impressed by the remark ofMr. Thomas to the effect that a level of $600 million of free reservesperhaps was necessary to obtain some credit expansion. Therefore, he wouldhope that free reserves could be maintained in the range of $600-$650million if possible, having in mind the concern that the Committee stillmust have for the international situation and the short-term rate. Hewould not favor a change in the discount rate at this time, and he had no 3/7/61 -54-suggestion with regard to the directive except that he would prefer to haveit call for fostering "recovery" rather than "sustainable growth."Mr. Irons said that conditions in the Eleventh District were quitegood and that there had been some improvement in the past month. TheJanuary industrial production index for Texas was up two points, withfairly broad strength throughout the various categories, and constructionawards in January were at an all-time peak for that month. Departmentstore sales were up a little more than seasonally, perhaps due to goodweather, while the petroleum situation was a bit better than it had been.In March, production was on a 10-day allowable basis. In general, there-fore, District conditions were reasonably satisfactory, considering thestage of the present cycle.The position of District banks was liquid, Mr. Irons said. Therewas relatively little borrowing from the Reserve Bank, and District bankswere net sellers of Federal funds.Mr. Irons said his appraisal of the national picture was about asdescribed by Mr. Noyes. He went on to express satisfaction with theperformance of the Desk during the past month, and said he would like tosee a continuation of about the same degree of ease. He aligned himselfgenerally with the thinking of Mr. Mills with regard to open market policyUsing figures indicative of the policy he would have in mind, he would sayabout $500 million of free reserves, a bill rate of around 2-1/2 per cent,and a Federal funds rate of around 2-1/2 per cent, plus or minus a quarter. 3/7/61 -55-It would not disturb him if there was some borrowing, as in the past three-or four-week period. He would make reserves available, but not excessivelyso; he would not like to move toward further ease. For the period ahead,it would be fortunate if the Desk could continue to do as fine a job as ithad done during the past month. With regard to operations in the longer-term market, Mr. Irons said he believed Mr. Hayes had referred to a cautiousprobing. He liked this expression, and he would favor continuing alongthat line. He saw no reason to change the discount rate or the directiveat this time.Mr. Ellis reported that in the First District statistics indicatedcontinuation of a slight downward tilt in production and employment. Inthe light of this situation, it was somewhat surprising that businessoptimism could be as good as it was. Perhaps this was because in theFirst District the employment record, for example, had been a little betterthan that of the country generally in the past year. In construction therehad been some stimulation from nonresidential and heavy engineering contractawards, which tended to offset weakness in residential construction.Preliminary tabulations from the recently completed spring survey ofcapital investment intentions, covering companies representing about 15per cent of manufacturing employment in New England, indicated thatintentions for 1961 were about 2 per cent below the 1960 level. However,after elimination of the extremes within the survey, roughly no changewas indicated. Past experience with this series would indicate that any 3/7/61 -56-continuing contraction probably would be overstated, so the results ofthe survey were fairly reassuring. Consumer spending continued to holdup vell, considering the amount of unemployment. The ski resorts hadmissed most of the snow, and there appeared likely to be an early endto the season. Department store sales for the past four weeks were 4per cent above last year and the year-to-date sales were also up.Mr. Ellis remarked that business loan demand was stronger thanexpected in January, but that the banking situation continued to be oneof ease. Sales of Federal funds continued to exceed purchases, both innumber and amount, and the level of borrowing from the Reserve Bank wasthe lowest in the past five years. A check on mortgage loan rates atmutual savings banks indicated that six banks had lowered their averagerates but that four others had increased their rates, so in effect therewas no change in the level.Mr. Ellis noted a Boston member bank, in a special supplement toits monthly letter, had raised certain serious questions about the recentCommittee action authorizing operations in longer-term Government securities.After summarizing the nature of the comments in this release, Mr. Ellissaid he had made it a point to talk to several bankers, academicians, andrepresentatives of investment funds in order to obtain their reaction.In general, the opinions of the bankers ranged from strongly critical tocautiously neutral, while the academicians endorsed the move and felt thatit was overdue. In the judgement of the investment trust and pension fund 3/7/61 -57-people, the impact of the operations on interest rates would be relativelyminor. They did not expect too much, but they were watching developmentsclosely to judge the effectiveness of the action.With regard to monetary and credit policy for the next few weeks,Mr. Ellis suggested that perhaps a bill rate of around 2-1/4 per cent couldbe lived with satisfactorily. If the short-term rate was thought of as ahurdle set up for the Manager of the Account, he would say that the hurdleshould not be raised progressively. As to free reserves, he would endorsethe view that they should run above $500 million, perhaps around $600million, with sufficient reserves available in the market to encouragecredit expansion in view of the widely recognized level of unemploymentand the need for supportive action in that direction. He would prefer tohave free reserves at around that level rather than to go below, say, $500million in the hope of obtaining a reaction in longer-term rates againstrates in the short end of the market. As to the directive, he had hopedthat at this meeting the Committee might change the directive to providefor fostering or stimulating recovery. In general, the directive wasacceptable to him.Mr. Szymczak said that he would favor no change in current policy,which he thought was about as right as it could be in the circumstances.He added that he agreed wholeheartedly with the comments of Mr. Bopp.Mr. Balderston said he was pleased with the way the Desk hadconducted operations since the February 7 meeting, except that he felt the 3/7/61 -58-bill rates need not be kept quite as high as they had been on some occasions.He would hope that with some clearing of the international situation theSystem might be able to get along with a lower bill rate, say in the rangefrom 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 per cent. Further, he would like to see the bill rategive the appearance of some vacillation so people would not think that theSystem was pegging the rate. As to the domestic situation, he was impressed bytwo points. First, he thought there were signs of recovery. Consequently,any reserves that the System now fed into the banking system might be putto more constructive use. Second, the Committee must look ahead to thesecond half of the year and remember that there would be deficit spending atthat time. This raised a question to which he did not have the answer at themoment; namely, how monetary and fiscal policy could best be integrated as totiming and degree. One way of looking at the problem had been expressed byMr. Mills. In the fall the System would have to help the Treasury get itsfunds. Another way to look at the problem was in terms that now was thetime for the System to do its work in stimulating investment, which wouldbe needed, he supposed, if that part of the unemployment associated withheavy durables was to be absorbed. For the moment, he would feel that theSystem ought to continue to supply reserves, that it should continue atleast the current degree of ease. Perhaps the System could afford to be alittle less sensitive to the international problem than it had been in theweeks immediately past. 3/7/61 -59-Chairman Martin said he did not think there were great differencesthis morning. As he saw it, the most important thing was that as long as thelevel of unemployment that had existed continued to prevail, and as long asthere were uncertainties in the business situation, the posture of theFederal Reserve System ought to be one of doing everything it could toencourage and promote recovery. On the other hand, the balance-of-paymentssituation had not been corrected. In passing, he would make the observationthat perhaps there would continue to be a substantial problem in thisrespect even when a full-fledged recovery occurred. Some people were begin-ning to say that in the event of economic recovery there would be no balance-of-payments problem. In his view, however, if the wage-productivityrelationship got out of hand at this stage, the situation would be serious.Chairman Martin said that he could understand the problem faced bythe Desk, part of which reflected the nature of the comments made at Committeemeetings. He did not know how to deal precisely with terms such as color,tone, and feel of the market. Such words might mean one thing to him andsomething different to others. Nevertheless, he would not like to seethe Committee eliminate its guidance with respect to the short-term rateor to eliminate its guidance or leadership with respect to the longer-termrate. However contradictory it might sound, he felt there was a differencebetween leadership or guidance on the one hand and pegging on the otherhand. This was a difficult course to steer but essentially, he thought,this was what the Committee wanted to do. He would take it that no one 3/7/61 -60-would want to attempt to say precisely what the level of free reservesshould be or to try to define exactly the right degree of ease. Generallyspeaking, however, a moderately easy money policy reflected the posturethat the System should be in at the present time and that it should retainuntil there was definite assurance not only of recovery but lastingrecovery and economic progress.Chairman Martin again stated that he thought there was not a greatdifference in the points of view expressed today. Several had commented ona possible change in the directive, but the majority clearly did not favora change. In his opinion this was not particularly important either way.However, he thought it migt be well to ask Mr. Rouse whether he wished tosuggest any changes in the policy directive or in the special authorizationgiven at the February 7 meeting with respect to operations in longer-termsecurities. In his (Chairman Martin's) opinion the Committee should givethe Manager as much latitude as possible without abdicating its interest inthe Open Market Account.The Chairman then turned to Mr. Rouse, who said that possibly theCommittee might like to combine the policy directive and the specialauthorization for operations in longer-term securities given at the February7 meeting, but that he did not know exactly how that might be done. Mr.Rouse went on to say that he could understand the feeling Mr. Robertsonhad expressed about offsetting operations in the short-term area, for thereappeared to have been some confusion on that point. The question had been 3/7/61 -61-discussed at the New York Bank and finally was resolved in a manner thatreflected the Bank's understanding of the Committee's over-all intention,but there was room for difference of opinion. Mr. Rouse said it was hisunderstanding from the discussion at this meeting that the Committee wouldlike to see some resistance to any sharp decline in short-term rates, andthat it would like to have a decline in longer-term rates encouraged. Thelimitation on the volume of operations would continue to be the figure con-tained in the policy directive adopted at the February 7 meeting, and inthe longer-term sector the latitude for operations would continue to bethe figure contained in the special authorization given on February 7.He went on to say that it would be necessary to put reserves into themarket currently, and in the next 10 days, to the extent of about $500million. In view of the Treasury financing, he did not know exactly howthis would work out, but if the Treasury should do some financing thatrequired reserves it might be possible to add somewhat to their availability.This, Mr. Rouse said, would be his interpretation of the instructions beinggiven to the Desk at this meeting.Chairman Martin said he thought this stated the matter quite well.He added that it was necessary to steer in a rather wide area and that hedid not know how this type of operation could be pinpointed.Mr. Allen referred to the special authorization for operations inlonger-term securities given by the Committee at the meeting on February 7.As he had indicated at the February 7 meeting, when he was an alternate 3/7/61 -62-member rather than a member of the Committee, he was opposed to thedecision to authorize transactions in longer-term securities. He con-tinued to be of that view. Therefore, now being a member of theCommittee, he would like to have his vote recorded in opposition to thecontinuation of that authorization, for the reasons that he had thenindicated. He added that he was in agreement with the reasons presentedby Mr. Robertson as recorded in the minutes of the February 7 meeting.Mr. Robertson said that he was, of course, of the same view asMr. Allen. He then requested verification of the dollar limitationcontained in the authorization.Mr. Rouse replied that, as he understood it, the authorizationon February 7 was for a change, between that date and the date of thecurrent meeting of the Committee, of not more than $500 million in theAccount's holdings of intermediate and longer-term securities, alongwith authority to acquire securities of this category up to a maturityf 10 years.Mr. Robertson agreed that the authorization had been correctlystated.Chairman Martin inquired whether there were others who wishedto record a dissent. There being no such indication, the Chairman thenstated that between this date and the date of the next meeting of theCommittee, it would be understood that the Account Management wouldproceed under the terms of the policy directive as supplemented by 3/7/61 -63-the special authorization for operations in intermediate and longer-termsecurities.Mr. Hayes commented that it had been the practice of the Committeeto issue a policy directive to the New York Reserve Bank at each meeting,but that the language thereof was changed only infrequently. However, ateach meeting there was also a statement of the consensus of the Committeeas to open market operations in the forthcoming period. It was notentirely clear to him whether the authorization to the Manager of theAccount extending the maturity spectrum in which he was to operate wasintended to be a part of the policy directive or a part of the instructiongiven by the Committee on open market operations. He felt that probablyit was intended to be a part of the supplemental instruction.Chairman Martin commented that the special authorization wasgiven at the February 7 meeting in accordance with the provision in theCommittee's statements of operating policy which make it clear thatexceptions may be made by the Committee at any meeting. At this meetingthe Committee was reasserting the action taken at the February 7 meetingin granting the special authorization.Mr. Hayes then said it was his understanding that the specialauthorization and the policy directive were not mutually exclusive, towhich Chairman Martin replied that until further action on the part ofthe Committee there would be in effect both the customary policy directiveto the New York Bank and the special authorization of the Committee withrespect to operations in longer-term securities. 3/7/61 -64-Mr. Johns commented that it had been emphasized at the meetingon February 7 that the special authorization was not intended to changemonetary policy, and that transactions carried out under it should beconsistent with the general monetary policy expressed in the Committee'spolicy directive.Chairman Martin replied that Mr. Johns' statement as to monetarypolicy was correct.Mr. Mills pointed out that the special authorization on February7 constituted an authority for a change in Account holdings of inter-mediate and longer-term securities not to exceed $500 million. He notedthat certain operations subsequently had been conducted under thatauthorization, and for this reason he raised the question whether itwas understood that the authorization of $500 million was beingreestablished at this meeting. He also inquired whether it had notbeen indicated at the February 7 meeting that the authorization includedthe power to purchase up to $400 million of securities maturing beyond15 months and up to 5-1/2 years, and an additional $100 million ofsecurities maturing beyond 5-1/2 years and up to 10 years.Mr. Rouse responded to the second question of Mr. Mills bypointing out that in the plan he had presented to the Committee onFebruary 7 he had suggested dividing an authorization of $500 millionin the manner mentioned by Mr. Mills. However, it was his understandingthat the decision reached by the Committee at that meeting provided an 3/7/61 -65-authorization of $500 million with no breakdown, He further understoodthat it was now the intention of the Committee to reestablish theauthorization of $500 million for the period until the next meeting.Chairman Martin stated that this was correct and that the $500million authorization was for the period from this date until the nextmeeting of the Committee. He also stated that there was no change inthe over-all limitation of $1 billion contained in the first paragraphof the Committee's policy directive.There was no indication of dissent from the statement by ChairmanMartin with regard to the scope of the special authorization or itsrelationship to the policy directive.Thereupon, upon motion duly made andseconded, it was voted unanimously todirect the Federal Reserve Bank of NewYork until otherwise directed by theCommittee:(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges (includingreplacement of maturing securities, and allowing maturities torun off without replacement) for the System Open Market Accountin the open market or, in the case of maturing securities, bydirect exchange with the Treasury, as may be necessary in thelight of current and prospective economic conditions and thegeneral credit situation of the country, with a view (a) torelating the supply of funds in the market to the needs ofcommerce and business, (b) to encouraging monetary expansionfor the purpose of fostering sustainable growth in economicactivity and employment, while taking into considerationcurrent international developments, and (c) to the practicaladministration of the Account; provided that the aggregateamount of securities held in the System Account (includingcommitments for the purchase or sale of securities for theAccount) at the close of this date, other than special short-term certificates of indebtedness purchased from time to timefor the temporary accommodation of the Treasury, shall notbe increased or decreased by more than $1 billion; 3/7/61 -66-(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the accountof the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with discretion, incases where it seems desirable, to issue participations to oneor more Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of special short-term certificates of indebtedness as may be necessary fromtime to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury;provided that the total amount of such certificates held atany one time by the Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed inthe aggregate $500 million.In addition, the Committee voted to renew the special authoritythat had been given at the meeting on February 7, 1961, relating tochanges in System Open Market Account holdings of intermediate andlonger-term securities. Specifically, the Committee authorized theFederal Reserve Bank of New York, between March 7 and the next meetingof the Committee, within the terms and limitations of the directiveissued at this meeting, to acquire intermediate and/or longer-term U. S.Government securities having maturities up to 10 years, or to changethe holdings of such securities, by an amount not to exceed $500 million.Votes for this action: Messrs. Martin,Hayes, Balderston, Irons, King, Mills,Shepardson, Swan, Szymczak, and Wayne. Votesagainst this action: Messrs. Allen and Robertson.Mr. Robertson's reasons for dissenting from the foregoing actionwere those he had stated at the meeting on February 7, 1961, and Mr.Allen indicated that his reasons for voting against the action werethose that he had expressed at the February meeting when he was not avoting member of the Committee. Mr. Allen added that he was in sub-stantial agreement with the reasons stated by Mr. Robertson at thatmeeting. 3/7/61 -67-In a memorandum dated March 3, 1961, which had been distributedto the members of the Committee and the Presidents not currently servingon the Committee, the Treasury-Federal Reserve Steering Committee forStudy of the Government Securities Market requested authorization fromthe Committee to proceed with the publication of current statisticson the Government securities market, with a publication target date ofMarch 30, 1961. The recommended publication program would supplyinformation on closing price quotations, volume of transactions, dealerpositions, and dealer financing, as shown in pro forma releases attachedto the memorandum. The publication time lags were intended to be shortenough to give the data current value, but long enough to obviate thedanger of injuring individual dealers. The proposed program had beendeveloped through a process of circulating to dealers a comprehensiveoutline of statistics that might be published and then cutting backsomewhat in the light of criticisms and objections received. It wasnot known whether all dealers would accept even the more limited programwithout further criticism or objection, and some revisions thereforemight still be required. Accordingly, the Steering Committee suggestedthat the staff be authorized to make such minor adjustments in theprogram as might seem appropriate to meet dealer comment. However, anymajor problem of dealer cooperation would be brought back to the OpenMarket Committee before publication was actually begun. 3/7/61 -68-As soon as the initial publication program was agreed to by theFederal Open Market Committee and the Treasury Department, the SteeringCommittee suggested that Mr. Hayes forward to each of the dealers aletter signed jointly by the Secretary of the Treasury and ChairmanMartin indicating the nature of the program and the starting date. TheSteering Committee also suggested that if positions figures were to beincluded in the program it might be indicated informally to the dealersfrom whom objections were anticipated that new legislation on thismatter was a likely alternative. If any of the dealers should refuseto continue to submit daily reports, the publication plans presumablywould have to be temporarily suspended. However, if no complicationsdeveloped the Steering Committee hoped that publication might begin onMarch 30, 1961.At the request of Chairman Martin, Mr. Young reviewed the scopeof the proposed publication program, the process by which it had beendeveloped, and the principal reservations expressed by dealers, hiscomments being based generally on the memorandum that had beendistributed. He then discussed the possibility of lack of cooperationon the part of one or more dealers and the purpose of the proposed jointletter from the Secretary of the Treasury and Chairman Martin.In discussion of the matter, Chairman Martin expressed the viewthat more public information on the Government securities market wasrequired and that it was necessary to take steps to arrange to have 3/7/61 -69-such information supplied in some way. Mr. Rouse expressed the viewthat the proposed program represented the minimum that should be done.With reference to the portion of the memorandum that suggestedgiving an informal indication to any objecting dealers that legislationwas a likely alternative, question was raised whether it would beadvisable for the Federal Reserve to make any statement that might beregarded as in the nature of a threat. In reply, it was brought outthat such advice would be a matter of supplying information for thedealers' consideration. At the same time, however, it was agreed thatcare should be exercised by the Federal Reserve to avoid anything thatmight be construed as a threat.At the conclusion of the discussion, the Steering Committeewas authorized to proceed along the lines contemplated by the memorandumof March 3, 1961.Secretary's Note: Under date of March 16,1961, a letter signed by Secretary of theTreasury Dillon and Chairman Martin wasaddressed to 18 Government securities dealerfirms in the following form:"In January 1960, the then Secretary of the Treasury andthe Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal ReserveSystem wrote the Government securities dealers requestingtheir collaboration in initiating and carrying out an infor-mation program covering the Government securities market.All primary dealers are cooperating in this program."You will remember that the earlier letter contemplateda trial period during which the data would be used only bythe Treasury Department and the Federal Reserve System.After this period, it was noted that selected composite datawould be published regularly on a current basis with anappropriate time lag. 3/7/61 -70-"The trial period has now run for almost a year. Thecurrent information on the market that has been collected hasbeen of real use to our two agencies."We are now ready to proceed with the publication phaseof the program which is described in some detail in Mr. Hayes'accompanying letter and its attachments. The publicationschedule indicated will be timely enough to give the datacurrent value. We feel that publication should enable marketparticipants, economists, and the general public to follow andanalyze better the major trends in the market, and that itwould contribute to an even better functioning market."Our staffs will continue to be available to work withyou in implementing this new publication program. Weappreciate your continuing cooperation in this effort toincrease the range of publicly available objective informationabout the market, particularly in view of the additionalreporting burden it places on your organization."It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open MarketCommittee would be held on Tuesday, March 28, 1961.The meeting then adjourned.Secretary