 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in theoffices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington on Tuesday, September 12, 1961, at 10:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Martin, ChairmanMr. AllenMr. BalderstonMr. IronsMr. KingMr. MitchellMr. RobertsonMr. ShepardsonMr. SwanMr. WayneMr. Treiber, Alternate for Mr. HayesMessrs. Ellis, Fulton, and Deming, Alternate Membersof the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Bopp, Bryan, and Clay, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Atlanta,and Kansas City, respectivelyMr. Young, SecretaryMr. Sherman, Assistant SecretaryMr. Kenyon, Assistant SecretaryMr. Hackley, General CounselMr. Thomas, EconomistMessrs. Baughman, Coldwell, Einzig, Garvy, Noyes,and Ratchford, Associate EconomistsMr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market AccountMr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMessrs. Holland and Koch, Advisers, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Knipe, Consultant to the Chairman, Board ofGovernorsMr. Yager, Economist, Government Finance Section,Division of Research and Statistics, Board ofGovernorsMessrs. Eastburn, Hostetler, Parsons, and Tow,Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banksof Philadelphia, Cleveland, Minneapolis, andKansas City, respectively 9/12/61 -2-Mr. Anderson, Financial Economist, Federal ReserveBank of BostonMr. Stone, Manager, Securities Department,Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkMr. Brandt, Assistant Cashier, Federal ReserveBank of AtlantaMr. Bowsher, Economist, Federal Reserve Bank ofSt. LouisChairman Martin noted that Mr. George W. Mitchell, who took hisoaths of office as a member of the Board of Governors and as a member ofthe Federal Open Market Committee on August 31, 1961, was today attendinghis first meeting as a member of the Committee.Chairman Martin also noted that according to his present schedulehe would be absent from the next two meetings of the Committee. For oneof those two meetings, Vice Chairman Hayes also expected to be absent.Accordingly, in the anticipated absence of both Mr. Hayes and himself,Chairman Martin suggested that it be understood that Mr. Balderston wouldpreside at the Committee meeting in question. No objection being indicated,it was so understood.Upon motion duly made and seconded,and by unanimous vote, the minutes of themeeting of the Federal Open Market Committeeheld on August 22, 1961, were approved.Upon motion duly made and seconded, andby unanimous vote, Mr. Ernest T. Baughmanwas elected to succeed Mr. Mitchell as anAssociate Economist to serve until the electionof a successor at the first meeting of theFederal Open Market Committee after February 28,1962, with the understanding that in the eventof the discontinuance of his official connectionwith the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, hewould cease to have any official connection withthe Federal Open Market Committee. 9/12/61Before this meeting there had been distributed to the membersof the Committee a report of open market operations covering the periodAugust 22 through September 6, 1961, and a supplemental report coveringthe period September 7 through September 11, 1961. Copies of thesereports have been placed in the files of the Open Market Committee.In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Rouse made thefollowing comments:Open market operations supplied a large volume of reservesto the market--$699 million on a delivery basis--since thelast meeting of the Committee. These reserves offset heavydrains stemming from changes in currency, float, and gold andforeign accounts.All of these reserves were supplied through outrightpurchases of securities, and by last Wednesday the SystemAccount portfolio amounted to $27.8 billion--the highest ithas ever been. Of the $699 million increase in System holdingssince the last meeting, $660 million was in Treasury bills.This brings the bill portfolio to $2,8 billion, $166 millionabove the level of last February 17, the day prior to thebeginning of operations outside the short-term area. Ourpurchases were partly responsible for bringing bill ratesdown to about 2.30 per cent in the case of the 91-day issue.However, our bill portfolio will decline by $144 million onThursday, since we bid in the auction yesterday to run offour holdings of this week's bills. In addition, if reserveprojections are borne out we will have a sizable amount ofselling to do in the next statement week, but we hope to sellas many coupon issues as we can, while holding our bills.These sales should result in higher bill rates, which mightwell be helpful in view of our deteriorating internationalposition. However, as a more general matter, I doubt whethersuch higher bill rates can be maintained if free reservesshould remain in the $500-$600 million range.The approach of the Treasury's financing program, andlater the program itself, were the center of attention in themarket during the recent period. The terms of the advancerefunding are regarded as generous by the market and theprogram as a whole has received generally favorable comment.Although ideas have not yet begun to jell as to how many ofthe $7.6 billion of the "rights" outstanding might be exchanged, 9/12/61there is no reason, barring some unforeseen development, whythe size of the turn-in should not be satisfactory. I mightpoint out, in this connection, that in the advance refundingsheld last March and September, about 31 per cent of publicholdings of the "rights" were exchanged.The System's holdings of the two "rights" total $700million--$562 million of the 2-1/2's of 1965-70 and $138 millionof the 2-1/2's of 1966-71. We hold $10 million of the 3-1/2'sof 1980, $41 million of the 3-1/2's of 1990, and $5 million ofthe 3-1/2's of 1998. I see no reason for the System to exchangeany of its holdings of the "rights", and plan no exchange. Wehave been informed, incidentally, that Treasury trust accounts,which currently hold somewhat over $1-1/4 billion of the "rights",plan to exchange up to $1 billion of such holdings.The balance of the Treasury's financing program calls forthe raising of $5 billion in cash between now and mid-October.This came as no surprise to the market, except perhaps for thesize of the June tax anticipation bill, which some had expectedwould be larger than $2.5 billion. The Treasury indicated tothe press that except for the possibility of borrowing smallamounts from time to time, the program announced last Thursdaymay be sufficient to meet the Treasury's cash needs for theremainder of the calendar year. Whether events will turn outthis way depends upon a number of factors, including theTreasury's decision as to whether it will handle the $7 billionNovember 15 maturity on a cash or an exchange basis. Even ifadditional cash financing this year is avoided, indicationsare that the Treasury will be in the market shortly after thenew year begins. Our own projections, for example, show aneed for about $3 billion in new cash by mid-January. Theheavy schedule of Treasury financing over the balance of theyear thus affords only brief intervals for overt policy actionby the System.In response to a question, Mr. Rouse said there should be a periodin the latter part of October when the Treasury financing schedule wouldpermit overt policy action if the System so desired. There might alsobe such a period in the Thanksgiving-Christmas area.Chairman Martin said he thought the only completely clear periodmight be in late October. The Treasury apparently could delay untilNovember 2, if it wished, the announcement on its November refunding. 9/12/61 -5-Mr. King inquired concerning the yields available under the termsof the advance refunding, to which Mr. Rouse replied that the cost of theextension to the Treasury would be in the range of 4-1/4 to 4-3/8 per cent.The yield to the present holders of securities eligible for exchange wouldbe in the area of 4.16 to 4.20.Thereupon, upon motion duly madeand seconded, the open market trans-actions during the period August 22through September 11, 1961, wereapproved, ratified, and confirmed.Mr. Noyes presented the following statement on economic developments:Economic developments, such as current movements in thingslike retail sales, production, employment, and prices, seemrelatively unimportant in the total complex of events of recentweeks. The resumption of bomb testing in Russia, the continuedtension in Berlin, the labor negotiations in the automobileindustry, and the prospects for a price increase in steel allseem to loom much larger than the fact that unemployment remainedat 6.9 per cent of the labor force, department store sales weresubstantially unchanged from July to August, production wasprobably up another point on the index, or that wholesale priceshave continued their sidewise movement, as consumer prices rose,due largely to an increase in food costs. Even our estimate ofGNP for the current quarter, at around $527 billion, seems staleas Government officials and others focus attention in theirpublic statements on such figures as a $54O billion GNP by yearend, or $575 billion by the end of next year. The Federaldeficit for fiscal 1962 even seems to have become yesterday'snews as public discussion focuses more and more on whether weare likely to achieve the balance predicted by the Presidentand the Secretary of the Treasury for fiscal 1963.While it goes without saying that one must avoid beingunduly influenced by the dead hand of the past, it is equallyimportant not to lean too heavily on projections and forecasts--no matter how carefully contrived--in shaping current policy.It is perfectly proper to speculate on the future course ofeconomic events and to project, either by highly technicalmathematical manipulations or long practice, past experienceinto the future. For some sorts of policy planning, estimates 9/12/61 -6-or projections of this kind are unavoidable. However, it takesonly a little familiarity with the heroic assumptions involvedto make clear that it is futile to speculate now as to whetheror not a GNP of $575 billion in the fourth quarter of 1962 is"inflationary", and it certainly would be foolhardy to beinfluenced in current policy formation one way or the otherby such an exercise.All this is by way of a rather lengthy prologue to, andapology for, a very brief and undramatic report on currentdevelopments. Frankly, there is nothing in current data, mostof which relates to the month of August, which calls formodification of the earlier generalization that the recoveryhas progressed rapidly, carrying almost all indicators to abovetheir previous peaks but without evidence of excessive exuberance.Some stimulation from added defense expenditures appears to bejust about offset by a lower level of consumer spending thanmight ordinarily be expected at this stage of the cycle.In addition to the facts about production, employment,prices, and retail sales that I have already mentioned, furtherevidence of this rough balance can be found in the rise of bothexports and imports in July, in the Commerce -S.E.C. report,released today, rf a very moderate upward revision of plantand equipment expenditure plans, and in the strong but notatypical behavior of manufacturers sales and orders.The likelihood that labor negotiations in the automobileindustry will be settled without a prolonged strike adds tothe stability o the current situation, whatever the longer-run implications of the settlement may be. In addition to thewholesale and consumer price indexes already mentioned, sensitiveindustrial material prices have shown little change recently.Consumer credit outstanding, which declined in July, appearslikely to decline again in August.At the same time, the Treasury has announced, as was antici-pated, a program to borrow over $5 billion of cash in the nextmonth or so. looking further in the financial area for clues,the situation is much the same, with bank credit expansion justabout seasonal. Stock prices have been fluctuating in a rela-tively narrow range, after their rapid run-up in the spring andearly summer, With the money supply remaining almost constant,seasonally adjusted demand deposit turnover has declined a littlesince May, which is quite unusual for a period of vigorousexpansion in GNP.One might argue, on the one hand, that were it not for theincreasing stimulus provided by the public sector, the recoverymight be less vigorous--perhaps even in jeopardy. On the otherhand, it is argued that the vastly increased liquidity of theeconomy, especially in the hands of consumers, constitutes a 9/12/61sort of powder keg of potential spending, which could betouched off by a very slight shift in peoples' psychologicalattitudes. My point, in summary, is that up to the presenttime there is no evidence to suggest that stimulus from publicsector will be withdrawn, or even reduced, nor of a dramaticincrease in consumers' spending or expressed intentions tospend. Hence, it appears that the precariously balancedupward movement in the economy, which has prevailed for somemonths, is being maintained.Mr. Koch presented the following statement on credit developments:Outstanding commercial bank loans and investmentsdeclined somewhat in August. This followed a large increasein July, due in the main to Treasury financing operations.The course of bank credit developments over the summer monthsis always greatly affected by the size and timing of Treasuryfinancing operations, since loan demands normally show littleseasonal change on balance.Business borrowing from banks, however, the most volatileelement in the loan portfolio, normally begins to pick up inAugust and early September, and this year's rise has thus farbeen of about seasonal proportions or possibly a little less.The heavy seasonal borrowers like food processors, commoditydealers, and trade outlets are beginning to come into thebanks.One aspect of the business loan picture that has struckme these last few months has been the large amount of grossnew borrowing despite the relatively moderate change in thenet volume of loans outstanding. Whereas many firms areborrowing from banks, a large number of others are repayingbank debt, to some extent in the case of the larger firmswith the proceeds from security financing. This largevolume of gross new business borrowing from banks probablyreflects in part the larger than seasonal increase ininventories that has occurred since March.Turning to the capital markets, new corporate bondfinancing fell off sharply in August, more than would havebeen expected seasonally. The September calendar has alsobeen light so far, but it is expected to pick up later inthe month. Stock financing in recent months has been lowin dollar volume but high in number of participants, indi-cating the increased availability of equity money to smaller,and possibly newer, concerns. New municipal and mortgagefinancing has continued in fair volume throughout the summermonths. 9/12/61As for the nation's liquidity, the money supply, narrowlydefined to include only currency and demand deposits, changedlittle in August for the fifth straight month. The rise intime and savings deposits at commercial banks, particularlythat in time certificate form, slackened slightly in Augustafter having maintained a sharp 15 per cent seasonally adjustedannual rate of increase earlier in the summer. You may alsohave noted that withdrawals in savings and loan associationswere particularly heavy in July, the latest month for whichsuch data are available, and that outstanding shareholdingsdeclined for the first time in several years. Withdrawalsare normally heavy in July, however, so on a seasonallyadjusted basis the drop merely meant that the rate of growthof savings and loan shareholdings dropped off somewhat.Insofar as the liquidity of financial institutions isconcerned, I was struck, on reviewing financing developmentsagain after several weeks away from the data, by the recentsharp increase in the secondary reserves of commercial banks,by which I mean their holdings of Government securities matur-ing under a year. The ratio of these holdings to deposits hasincreased to over 12 per cent, up sharply from earlier in theyear and now at the highest level since mid-1954.Entering as we are on a period of at least 18 months oflarge-scale Treasury financing, a large part of which will ofnecessity have to be in short-term form, the liquidity ofcommercial banks would likely increase considerably furtherin coming months unless bank credit expansion is restrained.In that case, somewhat higher short-term interest rates wouldno doubt be needed to induce a larger volume of nonbank invest-ment in short-term Government securities. The loan-depositratio of all commercial banks considered as a group continuesquite high and at 55 per cent is still only two percentagepoints below its recent high reached in the middle of last year.Turning to bank reserve positions, free reserves averagedabout $475 million last week after three weeks during whichthey approximated $550 million. Last week was a week of lowfloat, however, so the lower free reserve average was accompaniedby as easy money market conditions as had characterized theearlier weeks.In terms of total reserves, or more precisely seasonallyadjusted reserves available for private deposit expansion, thesituation has not changed materially over the three weeks sincethe Committee last met. Such reserves have shown practicallyno change on balance over this period, averaging about $19.2billion in both of the weeks ending August 16 and September 6. 9/12/61Looking ahead, the projections of both the staff of theFederal Reserve Bank of New York and that of the Board suggestfree reserves between $550 and $600 million again this week.In the following two weeks, market forces, unless their effectis offset by System action, would tend to increase such reservesmarkedly, mainly as a result of the mid-month rise in float,Only in the final week of the coming interval between meetingsof this Committee will the Desk be likely to have to supplyreserves to the banking system. Late in September and earlyin October, market forces, including payment for purchases ofthe new tax anticipation bill, could utilize as much as $700million of bank reserves.In considering what open market operations would be mostappropriate for this Committee to adopt for the coming three-week period, it is of relevance to note that since mid-June andpossibly since even earlier in the spring, we have experienceda rather sustained, if slight, downdrift, or at least sidewisemovement, in most broad banking and money measures, that is,in total commercial bank credit outstanding, total deposits,money supply narrowly defined, and total reserves regardlessof how defined. This has happened with average weekly freereserves varying in a range of between $400 and $600 million,with the feel of the market being generally quite easy, andwith the Federal funds rate below two per cent most of thetime. On the face of it, these developments might call forsome further easing in policy in the weeks immediately ahead.Two circumstances have to be weighed before reaching sucha decision. In the first place, international developmentsare in a state of crucial flux, domestic economic conditionsare on a steady rise, and Government fiscal policy is addingmaterially to exansionary market forces. Seasonal privateloan demands and Government short-term borrowing will bepotent factors for bank credit and monetary expansion through-out the rest of the year, particularly in the next few weeks.These developments all call for caution in easing credit andmonetary policy further at this time.Secondly, the fact that the Treasury will be in the marketwith new cash and refinancing ventures throughout the entirethree-week period prior to the next meeting of the Committeenormally calls for maintaining an even keel in monetary policy.Some slight easing action, however, has occasionally beenfollowed in periods of Treasury financing in the past and suchaction would not likely be either unfair or misleading to marketparticipants or the Treasury if adopted currently.All this adds up in my mind to maintaining the status quoin open market policy over the next three weeks, but being 9/12/61especially alert to the fact that market developments,particularly on the expansionary side, could develop quitesuddenly, thus requiring prompt re-evaluation of theappropriateness of current policy.Mr. Young presented the following statement on the balance ofpayments and related matters:The disturbingly large transfer of gold and dollars fromthe United States to foreigners in July, reported to you atthe last meeting, now appears to have been mainly accountedfor by temporary factors. These include an extra largeoutward capital movement, a reduced trade surplus, reflectingespecially a big, contraseasonal rise in imports, and theseasonal increase in tourist expenditures.It is all too easy to over-emphasize and over-rationalizethe temporary causes of any swing in our payments balance fromthe less adverse to the more adverse, and to conclude that thepayments balance is really not so grievous a problem after all.The fact of the matter is, however, that our background is oneof a decade of sizable deficits and, in consequence of thecumulation of these deficits, a diminishing margin of monetaryreserve protection. Accordingly, any swing from smaller tolarger deficit, even if temporary, must be viewed with concern.At the same time, the balance-of-payments situation mustnot be allowed to get out of focus. According to very prelim-inary indications of the New York Reserve Bank's flash reporton U. S. transfers of gold and dollars to foreigners for August,the U. S. balance of payments for the latest month must havebeen in close balance. Projection for September and theremaining months of this year is nothing but guesswork. As ofthe moment, our best guesses suggest further deficit, but notof alarming size unless aggravated by adverse confidencedevelopments that activate outflows of short-term funds.The reduced trade surplus mentioned above was the resultof a rise in imports more than offsetting a marked recovery inexports. Imports on a seasonally adjusted basis rose a full16 per cent, the largest rise in any single month in the postwarperiod. It seems doubtful that a rate of increase of this sizecan be sustained. Exports also rose significantly on a seasonallyadjusted basis, and regained a $20 billion annual rate, about$1/2 billion higher than in April and May. The demand situationcontinues favorable in Europe and elsewhere for U. S. exports,and while the gains ahead may fall well behind those of imports,they should still contribute positively to holding down ourbalance-of-payments deficit. 9/12/61It is too early, of course, to evaluate the recentmeasures taken by the United Kingdom to correct its chronicdeficit in its basic balance of payments. The spot poundhas strengthened considerably but the forward pound remainsat a sizable, though moderately reduced, discount. In July,the trade deficit decreased modestly further, but mainlybecause of reduced imports. In August, curbs on outwardcapital flows showed signs of taking effect. In addition,the IMF drawing strengthened U. K. reserves and made evidentto those short of sterling the risks in their positions. InAugust, some inflow of investment funds and reflow of short-term funds to London apparently occurred to take advantageof the high levels of British interest rates.The wage pause that the British are endeavoring toenforce is of particular interest. So far, its strictenforcement has been limited to the public sector and to theminimum wage categories of the private sectors which have tohave Government approval. A major test looms up later thisyear when wage claims for railway and mining workers in thepublic sector and for the engineering trades in the privatesector will come to a head.In August, the monetary reserves of Germany continuedthe decline which had set in in July. Since the basicbalance on current and recorded long-term capital accountremains in surplus, the main influence appears to be thewithdrawal of foreign funds invested in Germany on a short-term or on a speculative investment basis.The Bundesbank, despite the outflow of foreign funds,has pressed ahead with an easy, or still easier, monetarypolicy. Comparable money rates recently have either beenas low or only moderately higher than in the U. S. Meanwhile,commodity prices in German wholesale and retail markets haveremained fairly stable, but wage costs have been showingmarked increase--about twice that of the increase in laborproductivity.The French accumulation of gold and foreign exchangereserves has been on an ascending scale--amounting to nearly$900 million for the first seven months. Since the tradeaccount has been in approximate balance or moderate surplus,an exceptional capital inflow and, more recently, better thanusual tourist receipts appear to provide the explanation.Because of the large foreign exchange accumulation, the Frenchauthorities repaid in August the remaining debt to theEuropean Payments Union creditors amounting to a little over$300 million.-11- 9/12/61Resurgence of Canadian economic activity and decline inCanadian unemployment is now well confirmed by current economicdata. In recent months, the Bank of Canada has aggressivelypromoted easy credit conditions, including active purchasingin the long-term sector of the market. Bond yields have beenheld stable at just under 5 per cent and money rates havedeclined to levels close to those in New York. In the meantime,monetary expansion has attained a pace that appears very rapidby Canadian historical standards--an annual rate of 15 per centor so. The Canadian dollar has been showing only slightvariation around the level of 97 cents. Apparently this levelhas been holding without official support. At the bargain ratefor Canadian dollars, there has apparently been active buyingof Canadian securities by Americans.Mr. Treiber presented the following statement of his views on thebusiness outlook and credit policy:Since the last meeting of the Committee the internationalpolitical situation has worsened. This development impliesstill further increases in spending for defense. It increasesthe possibility of a more rapid step-up in business and con-sumer spending; it increases the possibility of the emergenceof a speculative psychology. So far, however, there is nodiscernible evidence that the trend of the economy or of publicpsychology has changed significantly.While the over-all expansion of economic activity iscontinuing at a healthy rate, there are no clear signs of anacceleration in pace. Consumer spending is still lagging andsurveys of consumer buying intentions point to a continuedcautious attitude. Business inventory building appears to bemoderate and in line with the current stage of the businesscycle, and there is nothing in current loan data or in reportedinventory plans to suggest a very rapid inventory build-up inthe immediate period ahead. The economy is still operatingconsiderably below capacity in terms of both labor force andphysical plant.What is the probable trend of prices? The increases inJuly in the consumer price index and the wholesale price indexwere dominated by seasonal advances in the prices of food andfarm products, and do not seem to reflect a sudden shift inthe forces of supply and demand. The expansion in over-alleconomic activity that now appears in prospect is unlikely to-12- 9/12/61create any strong and general price pressures from the demandside in the immediate future. Yet we cannot be complacentabout prices. There is the highly important question as towhether there will be a strong upward push on prices from thecost side, resulting from wage increases in the steel andauto industries and other wage increases growing out of wagenegotiations in other industries.While we do not know the full import of the proposedarrangements between the United Auto Workers and AmericanMotors Corporation and General Motors Corporation, thesettlements related to pay seem generous. Increased fringebenefits add importantly to costs as do increases in directwage rates, The total increases seem to be well above theaverage improvement in productivity throughout the economy.Increases of such size tend to lead to increases in wage ratesin other industries regardless of the extent to which produc-tivity in those industries may have increased; this is ofspecial significance for the service industries. It seemsto me that the cost of living is bound to rise unless someof the benefits of increased productivity are shared withconsumers through some reduction in prices or improvement inquality of manufactured goods. The prospects of such sharingare dim. Public and Government pressures in this directionwould be welcome.The bank credit picture has changed little in recentweeks. The large drop in August in loans and investments atthe weekly reporting member banks was associated with a largedrop in bank holdings of United States Government securitiesand security loans--a logical aftermath of the upsurge inJuly in connection with large Treasury borrowing. In contrast,business loans showed only moderate strength. Consumer loansand loans to finance companies increased somewhat in August.Bank liquidity continues to be satisfactory.The recently announced Treasury financing will result inincreased bank loans and investments, and in due course thenewly created deposits will find their way into the privatespending stream. The Treasury's advance refunding has beenfavorably received; it has been viewed as tangible evidenceof the desire of the Treasury to pursue a conservative debtmanagement program. Since the Treasury is now engaged in alarge and complex financing program, an "even keel" in themoney market is desirable.While international political and military tensions havebeen increasing, our international financial position has beendeteriorating. Our trade surplus has declined greatly comparedwith the first quarter of 1961. With further economic expansion-13- 9/12/61at home and less ebullient economic activity abroad, ourimports are likely to rise much more quickly than our exports.Our balance-of-payments problem is as serious as ever. Wehave two major jobs to do and several minor ones. As acountry we must strive with all our power to keep our costsdown; success in this respect will promote stability at homeand strength abroad. We must persuade the more developedcountries of the western world to assume a larger portion ofexpenditures abroad for defense and economic aid. The solutionwill not come soon; it will not come easily. Meanwhile, we arevulnerable to substantial demands upon us for gold.Since the last meeting of the Committee the price of goldhas risen further in the London gold market, attaining about$35.20 per ounce. As international political tensions increase,the demand for gold is likely to rise further. Capital flowsbetween foreign centers may increase the demand upon us forgold if the receiving country follows the practice of keepinga larger portion of its reserves in gold than does the countryexperiencing the outflow. While there is still no great monetaryincentive to move funds from New York to London on a coveredinterest arbitrage basis, the advantage in such a movement mayincrease. As the British succeed in their present stabilizationprogram--and we hope they will--there will be increased incentivesto move funds from New York to London on an uncovered basis. Ayear of exploratory negotiations on possible ways to strengthenthe international financial system has pointed up the many com-plexities to be resolved. Confidence, especially internationalconfidence, is a fragile flower. We must be constantly alertso to conduct our monetary and fiscal affairs that we provideno basis for those abroad to raise questions regarding theultimate soundness of the dollar.A policy of monetary ease is still called for. At thesame time there is an intensification of the need for alertnessto developments that may call for a shift in policy. The riskthat economic expansion will falter has receded further whilethe danger of rapid deterioration in the international financialposition of the United States has increased. Thus it is evenmore important now than it was a few weeks ago to pay specialattention to international considerations and resolve doubts onthe side of less ease.Higher short-term interest rates should be encouraged.The rate on three-month Treasury bills, the bellwether of short-term interest rates, is now below 2-3/8 per cent, the midpointof the 2-1/8-2-5/8 per cent range that has existed over the lastyear. We think that domestic and international developments make 9/12/61 -15-it desirable that the rate be in the upper part of that range.A rise in the Federal funds rate also seems appropriate. Itwould seem desirable that the effective rate on Federal fundsbe a bit below the discount rate, ranging between 2 per centand 3 per cent, perhaps averaging about 2-1/2 per cent. Toachieve these results, less attention should be given to theprecise level of free reserves.We believe that the authority to engage in transactionsin longer-term securities should be continued and that thediscount rate should not be changed. Nor would we suggest achange in the directive, which was revised at the last meetingof the Committee.Mr. Ellis said the few available statistics for August on businessconditions in the First District suggested that the recovery was proceeding.However, the trend could not be characterized as vigorous. According tothe statistics, there had been an interruption of the recovery trend inJuly; production figures declined and despite higher electric power outputthe level was below that of a year earlier. The textile industry appearedto be coming to life, with civilian demand strengthening and militaryprocurement rising, while shoe production was running 5 per cent below1960. Slower sales had caused some factories to hold back price increases,but it was still hoped that sales would be strong in the fall. A largenewsprint producer who had been looking for an opportunity for some timeto increase prices so as to catch up with wage increases now found hiscompetitive position affected by the decline in the Canadian dollar. Asto construction, July is usually a weak month in New England and thisyear had been no exception, with the total down 13 per cent from a yearago. Total nonagricultural employment, seasonally adjusted, rose slightlyin July and about matched year-ago levels, but most manufacturing industries, 9/12/61 -16-along with transportation and public utilities, were employing fewerpeople than a year earlier. Consumer spending was fairly good, withauto sales fair and department store sales quite vigorous. Thelatter had exceeded year-ago levels in all but one week since May.Perhaps the District's recovery movement was showing upbest in the financial statistics, Mr. Ellis said. For the year todate, business loans at weekly reporting banks were up about 4 percent compared with a decline of 2 per cent for the country as awhole. The level of total deposits had held about even during thepast four months, with the result that the average loan-deposit ratiowas up two points from 64 to 66 per cent, whereas the comparable ratiofor the country as a whole showed a drop of two points to 60 per cent.The New England average was influenced somewhat by the fact that onelarge bank had a ratio of 71 per cent. While the growth of totaldeposits was disappointing, demand deposits had been doing well.Even since the April peak for the nation, they had continued to growin New England. The monthly survey of mutual savings banks indicatedthat 11 out of the 80 banks in the survey reduced their average mortgagelending rate by 1/4 per cent from June to July.Turning to policy, Mr. Ellis said the reports from the AccountManager indicated that the Desk had succeeded in weathering a periodwhen it was necessary to supply large quantities of reserves withoutupsetting the market or interest rate levels. Staff projections for 9/12/61 -17-the next three weeks suggested that offsetting actions of the kindundertaken in the past period would have to be reversed to avoiddeveloping an excessive degree of ease during the Treasury financingperiod. He felt that the Committee had established a satisfactoryand correct stimulative policy and degree of ease, and that it shouldendeavor to maintain the status quo during the ensuing three-weekperiod. This would mean preserving the current targets with respectto total reserves, as shown in the staff projections, and maintainingfree reserves at existing levels. In his opinion it would be desirableto maintain contact wth the longer-term market, and therefore he wouldrenew the special authorization. He saw no need to change the directiveor the discount rate at this time,Mr. Irons noted that, according to current reports, the EleventhDistrict was sustaining considerable damage from Hurricane Carla. Exceptfor this developmert, however, conditions in the District had been movingalong fairly satisfactorily. Various measures, such as industrialproduction, employment, and petroleum production and refining, wereall moving upward on a satisfactory and sound basis. There had beenan increase in retail trade recently, perhaps reflecting to some degreeanticipation of the Texas sales tax that became effective the first ofSeptember. The damage caused by the hurricane seemed certain to runinto large figures; the rice crop probably had been wiped out. A goodpart of the cotton narvest was probably in, but there seemed some 9/12/61 -18-likelihood of heavy damage to the citrus crop. However, agriculturalconditions in the western part of the State had been good and thecotton situation in the southern plains area was favorable.As to District banking developments, there had been an advancein gross loans, some liquidation of investments, and a fairly substantialgain in deposits, both demand and time. From the standpoint of liquidity,the condition of the banks was about the same as it had been, and therewas virtually no borrowing from the Reserve Bank. Federal funds trans-actions had been showing an excess of purchases over sales for Districtbanks as a whole, but the situation in Houston was completely differentfrom that in Dallas, the Houston banks being consistent sellers and theDallas banks consistent buyers.Turning to policy, Mr. Irons expressed himself as satisfied withdevelopments during the past three-week period. In his opinion, neithercurrent or prospective economic developments suggested a need for furthereasing, and the Treasury was in the market. Therefore, he would recommendcontinuing about the same degree of ease that had prevailed, with anydeviations on the side of mild firmness rather than additional ease.This would suggest a bill rate in the range of 2-3/8 -2-1/2 per cent,with the Federal funds rate running from about 2-3/4 per cent down toabout 2 per cent and free reserves in the area of $450-$500 million.He would favor continuing the special authorization covering operationsin longer-term securities, and he would not recommend a change in thediscount rate or the directive. 9/12/61 -19-Mr. Swan said that he found few, if any, significant changesin the Twelfth District data that had become available since theprevious Committee meeting. Nor did there seem to have been anysignificant change in business attitudes in the District since thattime. On balance, there appeared to be some continuing improvement,but it was not notably vigorous. In brief, there had been little orno intensification of the gradual upward movement. In August, employ-ment moved up a little in California, the only State in the Districtfor which August figures were yet available, and based on employerhiring schedules a slightly more than seasonal increase in employmentmight be expected in September.There was no particular evidence of pressure on the availabilityof bank credit at the major District banks, Mr. Swan said. The banksseemed to have funds to offer, and borrowing from the Reserve Bank hadbeen negligible. On the other hand, during the past few weeks twolarge savings and loan associations in San Francisco found themselvesmuch tighter than they had anticipated due to a somewhat lesser flow offunds from their shareholders during the summer and some pickup in thedemand for real estate credit. This was indicated to have been a ratherunexpected development, and he was not prepared to say whether it wasof general significance.As to policy, Mr. Swan said he recognized the various possibilitiesof some increase in credit demands that might have to be checked. It 9/12/61 -20-seemed to him, however, that at the moment these remained onlypossibilities. One indication of such a development would be a surgein consumer spending, but no such surge had occurred as yet. Herecognized also that the effects of fiscal policy in all probabilitywould be expansionary in the several months ahead. As to the periodimmediately ahead, however, even apart from the fact that the Committeewould be circumscribed by the Treasury financing program, he saw noreason for positive action to change monetary policy in the directionof tightening. Instead, it seemed to him that the Committee shouldcontinue about the present policy. To him, that would mean a bill ratefrom 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 per cent and free reserves ranging from $500 to$550 million. If doubts arose, they might be resolved on the side ofless rather than more ease. He would recommend no change in the discountrate or the directive, and he would continue the special authorization.Mr. Deming said that a brief statement of recent Ninth Districteconomic developments would be "more of the same." Except for ironmining, general nonagricultural activity was moving about in line withthe nation. In July, District nonfarm personal income was 4.1 per centahead of July 1960, about the same as the national gain of ,.2 per cent.On the other hand, District agriculture continued to suffer from theeffects of drought and net farm income in July was 6.5 per cent belowa year earlier. Thus the District gain in total personal income from ayear ago had been only 2.8 per cent against the national gain of 4.2 percent. 9/12/61 -21-One indication of somewhat lesser strength in the District thannationally was to be found in the forecast of the Minneapolis employmentauthorities for employment in the Twin Cities area, which showed anestimated gain of 5,500 jobs from July to November. In the same periodlast year there was no gain, but in 1958 the gain was 12,000 and in thelike period of 1954 the gain was about 18,000.Mr. Deming commented that the District banking situation remainedabout the same as it had been. During the past three weeks, he said, theReserve Bank had been doing some intensive work on bank loan prospectsover the balance of 1961. Loan officers saw loan demand as being no morethan normal during this period, although some of them believed there mightbe some shift to direct bank loans from commercial paper financing. Thusfar, they saw little borrowing for inventory.As to policy, Mr. Deming said that for the next three weeks hefelt that quite obviously the Committee should go along on an even-keelbasis. Even so, however, he agreed with those who had suggested that anydoubts should be resolved more on the side of tightness than additionalease. Also, he would agree that the System must be alert to developments.Particularly during the past three weeks, he had been disturbed by havingheard more and more comments from the people with whom he talked aboutthe certainty of price increases. It was being said, for example, thatif one was going to build, obviously that could be done more cheaply nowthan two years hence. Altogether, there seemed to be more signs in theair suggesting some increase in belief in the inevitability of more inflation. 9/12/61 -22-While bankers apparently did not foresee any particular increasein loan demand, Mr. Deming commented that he did not see how a GNP figureof $54O billion could be attained by the end of this year without someincrease in bank loans. Accordingly, he felt that there would be astrengthening tendency for such loans to increase. At least, it wouldseem that the rate of bank credit expansion during the latter part ofthis year, while perhaps not explosive, might be stronger than generallyexpected. Looking ahead, therefore, the System should be alert to dowhatever it could so a; to be in a position to move to a more restrictiveposition, if necessary, particularly since the periods when there was anopportunity to move would be limited. The quality of alertness that hadbeen mentioned might be even more important in the latter part of thisyear than it would normally. As he had said, nowever, for the next threeweeks there did not seem to be much to do except to proceed along thesame pattern as now being followed, although being careful not to be anyeasier. He would not recommend changing the directive or discount rate,and he would favor continuing the special authorization.Mr. Allen reported that developments in the Seventh Districtwere for the most part, out not altogether, of an encouraging nature.In the four weeks ended September 2, Seventh District department storesales were 3 per cent higher than last year, an improvement over theearlier part of the year. Manufacturers' shipments of virtually alltypes of appliances rose substantially in June and July, and local 9/12/61 -23-manufacturers advised that this reflected higher consumer sales ratherthan inventory building. Furniture manufacturers had not participatedin that trend, however, new orders having been substantially below ayear ago throughout the first seven months. Reports from the vacationareas were that spending had been disappointing. Although totalemployment in Seventh District centers was about equal to last year inJuly, employment in manufacturing was lower in virtually all categories.Most employers expected a moderate increase in September.District steel makers expected production to reach an annualrate of 120 million tons in the fourth quarter compared with about100 million tons at present. The talk had been that selective priceincreases of 4 to 5 dollars per ton of finished steel would be madeeffective after the wage boosts in October. Since the last generalprice increase in August of 1958, it was said that employee costs hadrisen $8 per ton, or about 10 per cent, and that effective prices haddeclined slightly.Excellent corn and soybean crops and favorable price trends forcattle and hogs had improved farm income prospects in the District,Mr. Allen said.Turning to automobiles, he commented that the low sales inAugust were attributed to dealer hesitation because of strike possibilitiesand to inventory shortages of some models. On August 31 the stock of newcars was 663,000--530,000 1961 models and 133,000 1962 models. It was now 9/12/61 -24-expected that 520,000 cars would be produced in September and 1,800,000in the fourth quarter, which would mean total 1961 domestic productionof 5,651,000 automobiles. The sales forecasts now were 400,000 inSeptember and 1,600,000 in the fourth quarter, and if those figureswere realized the year's sales would total 5,581,000--close to the year'sexpected production. Sales of foreign-made cars were not included inthe figures he had quoted, but they were estimated at 375,000 for 1961compared with 499,000 in 1960.Seventh District weekly reporting banks showed a relativelystronger rise in business loans than all such banks in the country,Over the past three weeks commercial loans at those banks rose $54million, more than half of the total expansion reported by all leadingcity banks together. This experience was attributable to an increasein loans to metals firms. However, the figures were not large, andavailable indicators of bank liquidity suggested that the banks werein position to handle considerable loan expansion. For the money marketbanks, short-term liquid assets averaged 20 per cent of deposits comparedwith 10 per cent a year ago. The large Chicago banks had had a basicsurplus position of about $30 million for the past two weeks.Continuing, Mr. Allen commented that the rise in businessactivity was slower in the June-August period than in the previous threemonths, but that this was not surprising for a summer season and therewas much to support the view that activity would continue to rise, and 9/12/61 -25-possibly at a faster pace, in the remainder of 1961 and in 1962.However, the developments which were likely to accompany such anincrease in activity and which would call for a shift in monetarypolicy were not yet in evidence, in the Seventh District at least,and for that reason, and also because of the Treasury' s program, hewould favor continuing for the next three weeks that degree of easewhich had prevailed for some time now. He saw no reason to change thediscount rate or directive and he continued to oppose the specialauthorization.Mr. Clay reported that since midyear, loan volume at TenthDistrict weekly reporting banks had shown an increasingly strongperformance. Loan demand was comparatively weak at District banks,especially city banks, during the first half of the year, although therecession-induced decline in business and consumer loan volume was notas pronounced as in the country as a whole. During August, total loansof weekly reporting banks, other than money market and Commodity CreditCorporation loans, registered the largest increase for the month of anyrecent year. Real estate loans advanced for the fifth consecutive month.Consumer loans, however, continued to contract moderately. Increasedcredit requirements of seasonal borrowers appeared to have been the chieffactor in the rise in business loans. While the largest increase was inloans to commodity dealers, gains were registered in all classes ofbusiness loans except trade firms. 9/12/61 -26-Mr. Clay characterized developments in the domestic nationaleconomy as continuing to be very encouraging. While the cyclicalweakness in credit demand might be over and substantial credit expansionmight appear before the end of the year, bank loans had not yet enteredthe period of major cyclical advance. This was evident from the factthat the classes of business whose bank indebtedness tends to show thegreatest sensitivity to cycles in economic activity decreased theirloan volume during August.In view of the desired expansion in economic activity and theneeded credit availability for economic expansion, Mr. Clay felt thatit would be appropriate, so far as the private economy was concerned,for monetary policy to continue in approximately the same posture asduring the period since the previous meeting of the Committee. Thispolicy would provide about the same degree of monetary ease as in thepast three weeks. In view of the international flow-of-funds problem,it also would call for the maintenance of the Treasury bill rate withinthe range of recent weeks. In other words, open market operations thathe would consider appropriate would implement clause (b) of the directive,as adopted at the August 22 meeting, by "encouraging credit expansion soas to promote fuller utilization of resources, while giving considerationto international factors." The dominant factor during the period ahead,however, would be the recently announced Treasury financing program. Forthat reason, the maintenance of what had come to be referred to as an"even keel" policy was indicated. This phase of operations need not 9/12/61 -27-interfere, however, with the pursuit of the Committee's basic policyobjective of encouraging credit expansion for the private economy.Mr. Clay expressed the view that no change was called for inthe discount rate or in the directive. He felt that the specialauthorization with respect to operations in longer-term securitiesshould be renewed.Mr. Wayne said that Fifth District business conditions continuedto improve, with little deviation from the pattern of recent weeks.Nonfarm employment, seasonally adjusted, had climbed above the pre-recession high. Manufacturing man-hours also had moved up, but fellshort of last season's high. Textile prices were generally firm, andthe demand for bituminous coal appeared to be a little stronger to judgeby production and shipments. Reports from businessmen revealed moreconfidence than previously. They were appraising the near future withconsiderable optimism, they commented favorably on the trends of employ-ment and trade, and they reported substantial recent increases inmanufacturers' orders and shipments. Farmers had been favored generallyby good growing conditions, and tobacco prices were at record levels.District banks continued in an easy position, and business loan growthwas stronger than in the nation as a whole.As to policy, Mr. Wayne expressed the view that the coursefollowed during the past three weeks had been appropriate. In the faceof wide swings in market forces, the Desk had done a good job in holdingclose to the targets suggested three weeks ago. Personally, he was glad 9/12/61 -28-to see the bill rate decline moderately after the previous rise,although he would not care to see it go significantly lower.Mr. Wayne said he felt that during the past year System policyhad accomplished about all that could have reasonably been expected.Bank credit had increased something like $13 million during the pastyear, which apparently was adequate to meet the needs of the economy.Over the same period the money supply also increased, but only a littlemore than $2 billion. During the past six years, he noted, the increasein demand deposits adjusted was only about one-sixth as much as theincrease in bank credit over the same period. The fact that more depositshad not remained in the form of demand deposits seemed to him to indicatethat the public did not need more demand deposits. It was illogical toassume that the System could bring about an increase in the money supplyby forcing more bank credit on the public unless it was prepared to paya price that would be unjustified, particularly in relation to theinternational position of the dollar. The economy was now more liquidthan a year ago, and money could be obtained by reversing the processthat had been going on and converting liquid assets.In conclusion, Mr. Wayne said that he would not favor changingthe discount rate or the substance of the directive, and that he wouldcontinue the special authorization.Mr. Robertson said that both prevailing economic conditions andthe Treasury financing program seemed to dictate an even-keel policy forthe next three weeks. In the circumstances, he did not consider itnecessary to comment further at this time. 9/12/61 -29-Mr. Shepardson expressed the view that the general economicsituation called for a continuation of present policy. On the otherhand, he could not help but be concerned about the present and prospectivelevels of Government expenditures and about the continuing and possiblyincreasing international tension. Within the limits imposed by thecurrent Treasury financing program, it seemed to him that the Committeeshould lean somewhat toward a little less ease. Also, it should be alertto changes that could develop on rather short notice. He would favor nochange in the directive at this time.Mr. King noted that the balance-of-payments problem was stillserious, but that it could not be solved by monetary policy alone. Insaying this, however, he did not mean to infer that the confidence factorwas not important. Confidence in some currency was not only a psychologicalnecessity but almost a spiritual necessity to an alliance of countries thatbelieved in free markets. Any such alliance seemed bound to erode unlessthere was some currency in which the countries involved could have reasonableconfidence.As to current policy, Mr. King expressed the view that a continuationof the current degree of ease was in order. He would visualize maintenanceof the bill rate in the same area as at present and would consider any riseunnecessary. Even though prospective selling operations out of the OpenMarket Account might produce some tendency in that direction, he hoped anyincrease would be as small as possible. Likewise, free reserves shouldin his opinion be maintained in the same vicinity as at present. He thought 9/12/61 -30-this was not a time to start moving toward a more restrictive position.The Account Management, he commented, had proven capable in the pastyear of operating without too much instruction on the manner in whichto resolve doubts, and he questioned the need of giving this type ofinstruction to the Desk. There was a tendency, he thought, for theCommittee sometimes to feel that at least some minor change in instructionsshould be made over a period of a few weeks. However, the presentsituation was one in which he felt that the less the Committee did, themore likely it was to obtain a satisfactory solution.Mr. Mitchell commented that he thought there was some uncertaintyabout the course that the economy would follow. It seemed to him thatthe thrust obtained from the change in inventory policy on the part ofAmerican business had been largely exhausted. This was the reason,apparently, that the index of industrial production probably would notcontinue to rise as rapidly as it did this spring and early summer.What was really expected n a recovery was that some generative forcewould get other things started, namely, consumer and business spending,and it still seemed a little uncertain whether consumers were going tospend to the extent needed to keep the recovery moving. Thus far, therewas no convincing evidence from consumer spending or expectations thata second stage of tne recovery was going to eventuate. Then, too, alittle uncertainty was being evidenced by businessmen in terms ofinventory policy; in fact, operations were still on close to a hand-to-mouth basis. Further, pricing policies were not as aggressive as one 9/12/61 -31-would generally expect at this stage of recovery. It might be thatbusinessmen were alarmed by the antitrust activities of the Government,particularly in the electrical industry, but it might be also thatbusinessmen themselves did not have confidence in the recovery. Hedid not pretend to have the answer, but it seemed fairly clear thatthere was not the buoyancy and ebullience in businessmen's attitudesthat might be expected at a time like this. It was quite true thatGovernment policies were on the expansionist side and that they mightbecome more so. Also, it might be that the current wage settlementswere going to be disturbing as far as price developments were concerned,but again they simply might lead to more mechanization.For the next three weeks, Mr. Mitchell felt the Committee shouldnot take any action which would indicate that it thought any differenttype of monetary policy was required. The Desk should not show evidenceof resolving doubts on the side of additional ease or of additionalfirmness; instead, it should try to proceed right down the middle anddo nothing to give observers reason to say that the Federal Reserve waseither tightening or easing. The uneasiness and anxiety resulting fromthe cold war was undoubtedly affecting businessmen and consumers, andit should not be augmented by Federal Reserve action. He would not wantto try to stimulate the economy by frightening people, that is, by raisingfears about disturbances, whether hyperactive or faltering, in the economy.In summary, he would continue very much on an even-keel basis. 9/12/61 -32-Mr. Fulton reported that the heavy industry sector of the FourthDistrict economy had moved ahead moderately in August. There had been amoderate but more than seasonal abatement of unemployment, which seemedto have gone down at a rate a little faster than the national rate. Onthe other hand, unemployment in the District was such that the Districthad a longer way to go than the nation, and it was still a major problem.Construction had slackened a bit in the past month, Mr. Fultonsaid, and department store sales were not as good as in July, when theyreached an all-time high on a seasonally adjusted basis. For the yearto date, department store sales were down one per cent from a year ago.Automobile sales were lower in August, probably reflecting the hesitationincident to model changeovers.In the steel business, there was a slight downturn in Augustbut there had been a return now to a pretty fair rate of production.People in the steel industry felt that operations at the present levelplus about 5 per cent would persist for the rest of the year. There wasalso a feeling that the first half of next year would show greaterimprovement. Total output for the current year would probably be about100 million tons, with production at an annual rate of 120 million tonsin the last quarter. No observable inventory accumulation on the partof manufacturing industries was occurring, but it was thought possiblethat the automotive industry would put in some inventory commencing thefirst of next year in anticipation of a June strike in the steel industry. 9/12/61 -33-Whether a strike was inevitable could, of course, not be foretold, butat least it seemed to be indicated that the steel industry would tryto keep wage increases down. The demand for some types of steel,including galvanized sheets and merchant pipe, had been quite active.Some buyers of foreign pipe were now trying to make domestic connections,but more steel was still being imported than exported. So far as priceswere concerned, the steel industry was unanimous in claiming that aprice rise was an absolute necessity, particularly in view of the wageincrease which would be coming in October. The industry apparently hadinstalled about all of the labor-saving devices that could be put inplace. As to tin plate, the price of tin had risen to about $1.25 apound against $1 last year, thus raising the question how the sameprice for the product could be maintained in the face of cost increasesin both labor and material.As to the auto industry, the settlement currently in processseemed more inflationary than other recent settlements. Many of thebenefits were in the fringe benefit category, but they added to costs.Acceptance of the current settlement now depended on working out manylocal demands. In 1955, the contract was consummated in about a week,but no one was so optimistic this year.As far as policy was concerned, Mr. Fulton said he felt that acontinuation of the present posture would be quite appropriate. He wouldnot favor a change in the discount rate, and he thought that the specialauthorization should be continued. 9/12/61 -34-Mr. Bopp stated that business had been good in the Third District,with production and construction both rising. The Reserve Bank had beenmaking some additional studies of the unemployment problem and consideredit possible that there might be a break in the persistently high levelsof unemployment that had plagued the District for some time.Mr. Bopp expressed agreement with the view that there should beno change in policy. He would favor no change in the discount rate, thedirective, or the general degree of ease in the market.Mr. Bryan said that the reports and informal comments of thehead office and branch directors who attended the meeting of the Atlantadirectors last Friday seemed to be quite optimistic. He was not clearas to just why this attitude prevailed because District statistics showedno evidence of exuberant boom. There had been a little improvement innonfarm employment and in manufacturing employment, and the greatestrecent improvement probably was in construction contract awards. Otherfigures failed to show any boom situation or any rapid rate of improvement.He gained the impression, from conversations with the directors and withpersons outside the System, that there was a growing feeling that inflationwas again probable or perhaps inevitable. This did not strike him as agood psychological development for the country whatever might be the turnof events.As to policy, Mr. Bryan said he believed that in view of theTreasury financing the Committee was not in a position to make any 9/12/61 -35-essential change in policy at this time. Therefore, he agreed withwhat he sensed to be the general sentiment around the table. Perhapsthe Committee should provide some modest increment factor in supplyingreserves, and it should take care of seasonal variations. Other thanthat, however, it should do nothing.Chairman Martin noted at this point that Mr. Johns, who ordinarilywould have presented his views at this juncture, had been compelled toreturn to St. Louis this morning for personal reasons.Mr. Balderston expressed appreciation to the several membersof the Committee who had communicated with him concerning the procedurethat he had proposed at the August 22 meeting. The points raised hadbeen most helpful to him and also, he believed, to members of the staffwho had been working with the problem.Mr. Balderston then noted that the chart distributed before themeeting this morning differed in two respects from the chart distributedat the August 22 meeting. 1/ First, there had been a change in the basefor the two growth lines. This base had been reduced by cutting itsexcess reserve component from a figure of about $680 million to $600million. The higher figure had been used originally because it was theactual figure in the week of March 1, which was about the time when thecurrent business upturn was beginning. As some had noted, however, this1/ A copy of the chart is appended to these minutes as Attachment A. 9/12/61 -36-particular excess reserve figure was atypical. Thus, to the extentthat Committee members might wish to use this device for guidance, itwould be better to use the $600 million excess reserve figure, whichwas the same as employed in the data submitted throughout the summerby Mr. Thomas. The logical support for the $600 million base was thatit was sufficiently aoove the fairly consistent figure of excess reservesat country member banks to have provided some expansionary effect duringthe period since the first of March. Therefore, at the risk of addingan additional adjustment of the chart to enhance it, accuracy, he hadadopted this assumed, but more typical, base figure for the trend lines.Also, the chart distributed today reflected another kind of change fromthe previous chart. Consistent rounding down of the growth allowance,along with an error in adjusting the early July data of around $50million, affected the amount by which the actual reserves had appearedto depart from the two growth lines. The earlier chart reflected fairlyaccurately the direction that policy took during August but not thedegree or amount of departure from a straight course.Mr. Balderston recalled that the second portion of his suggestedprocedure three weeks ago had to do with the translation of open marketpolicy, as worked out in terms of total reserves, into the language offree reserves. At that time he had passed on an observation by thestaff that it might take almost $150 million more reserves in a weekfeatured by a bulge in float to have the same expansionary effect as a 9/12/61 -37-given level of reserves in a nonfloat week. Accordingly, he hadsuggested two targets for the weeks that had now intervened; namely,free reserves of about $500 million for the two weeks ending September 6,and over $600 million for the week that would end tomorrow. Thanks tothe Desk, and perhaps to chance, the actual and free reserve figuresfor the first two weeks provided a small test of his suggestion. Whilethe week-to-week fluctuation was sharp, free reserves for the two weeksaveraged $519 million and, as indicated by the chart, there was someexpansion, in the order of $50 million, in the total reserves madeavailable over that period. He hoped that the week ending September 13would see free reserves moving back to around $600 million, with somecorresponding upward fluctuation in the line of total available reserves.The import of such figures was that after some slippage in the rate ofreserve growth as the summer progressed, particularly in early August,there had been maintained since the August 22 meeting a reserve positionthat had induced a resumed rate of expansion of available reserves.At the previous meeting, Mr. Balderston noted, he had mentionedcertain basic factors that could cause the relationship of total andfree reserves to vary. In addition, two technical factors must betaken into account. First, the weekly seasonal correction could berelied on less than seasonals developed for monthly or quarterly data.Second, the attempt to distinguish between weeks of float bulge andother weeks involved guessing which weeks in the future would containsuch bulges. 9/12/61 -38-As to policy, Mr. Balderston suggested for the two probablehigh-float weeks ending September 27 a free reserve target somewherearound $600 million, and for the week ending October 4 a target ofabout $500 million. In short, he would seek to add to total reservesat the same rate that he had advocated three weeks ago, because neitherinternational considerations nor speculative ebullience seemed to callfor departure from such a course at the moment. However, he hoped theCommittee would be prepared to make a departure at any time if necessary.Chairman Martin said it appeared obvious to him that Systempolicy was progressing in a satisfactory way at the present time. TheTreasury problem would be acute for some time, so there was no particularreason for the System to rock the boat in any way. He took it from thediscussion today that the consensus favored no change in the discountrate, no change in the directive, and a continuation of essentially thesame degree of ease that had prevailed. He also understood that thespecial authorization would be renewed, with, he assumed, two dissentingvotes. The Chairman then inquired whether it was agreed that this inessence was the consensus, and no comments to the contrary were heard.Thereupon, upon motion duly madeand seconded, it was voted unanimouslyto direct the Federal Reserve Bank ofNew York until otherwise directed bythe Committee:(1) To make such purchases, sales, or exchanges(including replacement of maturing securities, and allowingmaturities to run off without replacement) for the SystemOpen Market Account in the open market or, in the case of 9/12/61maturing securities, by direct exchange with the Treasury,as may be necessary in the light of current and prospectiveeconomic conditions and the general credit situation of thecountry, with a view (a) to relating the supply of funds inthe market to the needs of commerce and business, (b) toencouraging credit expansion so as to promote fuller utili-zation of resources, while giving consideration to internationalfactors, and (c) to the practical administration of the Account;provided that the aggregate amount of securities held in theSystem Account (including commitments for the purchase or saleof securities for the Account) at the close of this date, otherthan special short-term certificates of indebtedness purchasedfrom time to time for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury,shall not be increased or decreased by more than $1 billion;(2) To purchase direct from the Treasury for the accountof the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (with discretion, incases where it seems desirable, to issue participations to oneor more Federal Reserve Banks) such amounts of special short-termcertificates of indebtedness as may be necessary from time totime for the temporary accommodation of the Treasury; providedthat the total amount of such certificates held at any one timeby the Federal Reserve Banks shall not exceed in the aggregate$500 million.The Committee then authorized theFederal Reserve Bank of New York, betweenthis date and the next meeting of theCommittee, within the terms and limitationsof the directive issued at this meeting, toacquire intermediate and/or longer-termU. S. Government securities of any maturity,or to change the holdings of such securities,in an amount not to exceed $500 million.Votes for this action: Messrs. Martin,Balderston, Irons, King, Mitchell, Shepardson,Swan, Wayne, and Treiber. Votes against thisaction: Messrs. Allen and Robertson.Chairman Martin then referred to a memorandum from Mr. Youngdated September 6, 1961, which dealt with the subject of the Open MarketCommittee's operating orocedures and policies and transmitted to theCommittee: (1) a draft of standing rules governing Committee open market-39- 9/12/61 -40-practice that was first distributed to the Committee early in Marchof this year, as revised to reflect further suggestions of Committeemembers and subsequent Committee operations and discussions, and(2) draft wording, in several alternative formulations, to separatethe Committee's directive to the New York Bank into two parts, acontinuing authority directive that would be adopted once each yearand a current economic policy directive that would be adopted at eachmeeting.In introducing the subject, Chairman Martin also referred totwo papers that were to be distributed to the Committee in the courseof this meeting. The first, prepared by Mr. Knipe, was a critique ofFederal Reserve policy, and its explanation, over the period 1949-1961.The second, prepared by Mr. Broida of the Board's staff, constituteda critical review of the language of clause (b) of the Committee'spolicy directives during the period 1957-1960. The Chairman furthernoted that he understood the Commission on Money and Credit would beforelong issue a paper containing a critical discussion of the Committee'sdirectives.Chairman Martin then commented that he thought it would be usefulfor the Committee to study the distributed material and see whether itcould develop a form of directive that would be an improvement, particu-larly as far as public understanding was concerned. While he was notsure the Committee could do much better than at present, he thought that 9/12/61 -41-discussion was always good and he was not defeatist in his attitude.In any event, the Committee should do everything it could to resolvethe problem. Although there might be some general discussion ofCommittee procedures this morning, what he had contemplated was thatthe Committee as a whole would try to hammer out something over a periodof time. He would suggest that this be done beginning at the prospectivemeeting on November 14, at which time both he and Vice Chairman Hayeswould again be in attendance. Otherwise, the Committee might run intothe new year before it could reach agreement.The Chairman then called for any discussion or comments on sucha program, and Mr. Treiber commented that the program seemed satisfactory.He indicated that the New York Bank would have some observations to makeon the documents transmitted with Mr. Young's memorandum of September 6.Perhaps it would be premature to have a discussion of them this morningbut, in general, as indicated on earlier occasions, the New York Bankwould look with favor on trying to break down the directive into twoparts. As to the economic directive, it was the current thinking at theBank that alternative "B", as set forth in the attachments to thememorandum, was probably the best of the several suggestions. As tothe standing rules, the New York Bank would have some basic comments andsome technical comments; it would also have some technical comments onthe continuing authority directive to be adopted once each year.Chairman Martin expressed the view that it would be desirablefor the New York Bank to prepare a memorandum that could be distributed 9/12/61 -42-to the Committee along with memoranda from others who might care tosubmit comments or suggestions. He thought it would be advisable forthe Committee to study the other two staff documents that he hadmentioned before going into the matter too extensively. However, theearlier the Committee started trying to pool its views on the subject,the better off it would be.Mr. Wayne inquired if he was correct in understanding theChairman to suggest that if any Committee member had comments theyshould be sent to the Committee Secretary for distribution, and thatthe sooner this was done the better, after the Committee members hadhad a chance to study the staff documents mentioned by Chairman Martin.Chairman Martin indicated that Mr. Wayne's understanding ofthe suggested procedure was correct.Chairman Martin then stated that, if agreeable to the Committee,the understanding would be to proceed on the basis that had been suggested,and no disagreement was indicated.Chairman Martin noted that there had also been included on theagenda for this meeting, at his suggestion, a discussion of the subjectof possible Federal Reserve holdings of foreign currencies. In thisconnection, there had been distributed to the Committee copies of amemorandum from Mr. Young dated June 16, 1961 (corrected June 26), asupplemental memorandum from Mr. Furth of the Board's staff, also datedJune 16, and a letter from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York datedJuly 21 commenting on Mr. Young's memorandum. 9/12/61 -43-Chairman Martin commented that he had thought it would bedesirable to have a general discussion of the subject at this time,particularly in order that he might have some of the thinking of theCommittee members before going to Vienna to attend the annual meetingsof the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank forReconstruction and Development. This did not infer that he intendedto discuss the matter in Vienna in terms of a commitment of any sort,but he no doubt would be asked questions from time to time. The problem,he thought, had been well stated in Mr. Young's memorandum, whichreferred, among other things, to the criticism of System foreign exchangeoperations by Senator Glass in 1932, when the Federal Reserve was concernedmore with bolstering foreign currencies than defending the dollar. Asthe memorandum pointed out, however, this was unquestionably a new period,and the Treasury through its Stabilization Fund had already embarked onforeign exchange operations in defense of the dollar.As he saw it, the Chairman continued, the handling of externalmonetary problems of this sort belonged primarily with the Treasury.Thus, there was a question whether the Stabilization Fund should notbe enlarged and the Federal Reserve should participate with the Treasuryin the handling of that Fund. To him, that was the critical problem.To use the Washington vernacular, he did not think that the System shouldbe seeking "power," or a role that would attract attention to the System.Instead, it should be seeking the best end result. It might be thatforeign exchange activities, if handled by the System, would be superior 9/12/61-44-to such operations if handled by the Stabilization Fund. However, anyoperations would have to be closely coordinated with the StabilizationFund, so that there was again presented a dual operating problem requiringFederal Reserve and Treasury cooperation.The Chairman went on to say that in his mind there was no questionbut that this country was going to be in the business of foreign exchangeoperations in one way or another. In his opinion the nature of worldconditions was such that some activities of this sort unquestionably wouldbe engaged in in some manner.Chairman Martin then turned to Mr. Treiber, who presented sub-stantially the following statement:We welcome the suggestion in Mr. Young's memorandum ofJune 16, 1961 (corrected June 26, 1961), that the FederalReserve, in the course of its regular operations, acquireand hold accounts in foreign currencies with major foreigncentral banks.Since March of this year the New York Bank, as fiscalagent of the United States, has conducted operations in theforeign exchange markets on behalf of the Stabilization Fund.In addition, as agent of certain foreign central banks, ithas conducted foreign exchange operations in the New Yorkmarket. Such transactions on behalf of the U. S. Treasuryand foreign central banks through June 30 exceeded $1 billion.Transactions on behalf of the Stabilization Fund wereundertaken, in cooperation with foreign central banks, forthe purpose of strengthening the dollar. Our experience haspersuaded us that United States intervention in the foreignexchange markets is a potentially highly effective instrumentfor defending the international position of the dollar andthat further use of this instrument should be exploredvigorously.The volume of foreign exchange that may be acquired bythe Stabilization Fund is, of course, limited by the size ofthe Fund. Its present size is about $1/3 billion, of whicha large amount is already tied up by stabilization agreementswith certain Latin American countries. The scope of acquisi-tion of hard currencies by the Fund is probably not much over 9/12/61$100 million. While the Treasury may eventually ask theCongress to authorize an increase in the resources of theFund, I understand that in any case the Treasury wouldwelcome Federal Reserve acquisition of foreign exchange asa helpful supplement to the Stabilization Fund.The primary purpose, as I see it, of System exchangeoperations would be to defend the dollar. Such operationsshould help to reduce the drain on gold and to influence therate of the dollar in relation to other currencies, and thuspromote confidence in the dollar.In very general terms, Federal Reserve holdings offoreign exchange might be built up during the fat years ofUnited States balance-of-payment surpluses and be run downduring the lean years of deficits. Even during periods ofdeficit, such as the present, opportunities exist for acquir-ing currencies of certain foreign countries which may be shortof dollars. There are seasonal as well as cyclical swingsin our balance of payments that affect our gold reserves andthe relationship of the dollar to foreign currencies. Theimpact of both types of swings might be cushioned by contrac-tion and expansion of our exchange holdings.Until recent months, the rate of the dollar in relationto other currencies has been determined exclusively by theexchange authorities of foreign countries. Abrupt declinesof the dollar to the floor of the foreign exchanges haveexcited speculation as to possible changes in currency parities.By having in its possession an adequate supply of the majorforeign currencies, the United States should be able to resistsuch pressures upon the dollar rate and thereby restrain asnowballing of speculative anticipations.It is useful to engage not only in spot operations butalso in future operations. Forward sales of German marksinitiated by the Stabilization Fund in March, in cooperationwith the Bundesbank, proved remarkably effective in restoringconfidence in the stability of the dollar-mark parity, as wellas restraining heavy German borrowing in the dollar market forhedging purposes. Forward operations in Swiss francs, subse-quently initiated, have also had a useful stabilizing effectupon expectations in the face of the sterling crisis and thenthe Berlin crisis; this success has encouraged the U. S.Treasury to plan to enlarge substantially the volume of forwardsales. Plans are also being made for forward operations inDutch guilders with the hope of stimulating a sizable flow ofDutch short-term funds to New York. In all of these forwardoperations, arrangements have been made to protect the UnitedStates from any risk of loss in the event of a revaluation ofthe foreign currency involved.-45- 9/12/61The recent undertaking of foreign exchange transactionsby the Stabilization Fund has promoted the development ofclose contacts and cooperation with officials of Europeancentral banks. The very fact of joint operations has requiredcontinuing consultations as to policy objectives and techniques.The consultations have been most harmonious; they encourage thehope of achieving the close cooperation of all the major centralbanks in their exchange markets. The importance of central bankcooperation is well illustrated by the operation undertaken byEuropean central banks to protect sterling after the Germanrevaluation. The European central banks have welcomed UnitedStates exchange operations as a vital step toward closing thering of central bank defenses against speculation in exchange.Beyond the immediate purpose of defending the dollar,United States operations in the exchange ma kets may contributeto a partial solution of the longer-term problem of insuringan adequate growth in international liquidity in order tofinance the secular expansion of international trade. Withthe flow of newly mined gold into official reserves tending tolag considerably behind the annual growth of world trade, thegrowth of international liquidity since the end of the war hasrelied primarily upon a growth in foreign holdings of dollars.But our ability to sustain a much larger volume of dollarliabilities has now become seriously weakened and a variety offar-reaching reform schemes have been proposed as a solutionto the problem of providing for future liquidity needs. Systemand Treasury officials have effectively pointed to a varietyof serious shortcomings in such schemes, and have urged insteadthat moderate reforms of the present international financialsystem, such as standby credit facilities of the InternationalMonetary Fund, offer the best hope of taking care of the long-term liquidity problem. While more ample credit facilities atthe IMF will unquestionably prove most helpful, growth ofofficial holdings of foreign exchange in currencies other thanthe dollar and sterling would provide a second important sourceof liquidity.On July 21, Mr. Hayes wrote Chairman Martin commentingon the subject of Mr. Young's memorandum. We endorse thesuggestion that day-to-day operations in foreign exchange beconducted under a standing directive of the Federal Open MarketCommittee, subject to the direction of and reporting to aSubcommittee. There is no need for me to review today theother comments and suggestions contained in that letter; allmembers of the Committee have received copies of the letter.In conclusion, I would urge that we move forward in plansfor the Federal Reserve to acquire and conduct transactions inforeign exchange.-46- 9/12/61 -47-Chairman Martin inquired of Mr. Treiber what limit he wouldcontemplate on operations such as suggested, and the latter repliedthat he thought the System would have to feel its way along. Heenvisaged that certainly the amount would be relatively small at thestart. In this connection, he noted that total transactions of theStabilization Fund had involved about $1 billion, but that the holdingsat any one time were only a small proportion of that figure. In anyevent, however, he had not come prepared today to suggest amounts ofoperations; instead, he had thought the discussion was to be more interms of principle and whether to move forward with the study ofproblems such as amounts and the manner of operations.The Chairman then stated that any other comments or questionswould be in order, and Mr. Allen said that he had a question. Justbecause a thing was legal, that did not mean that he would always wantto do it. On the legality of the proposed operations, however, he didhave a question. While he had not consulted Counsel for the ChicagoBank, he assumed that the matter had been reviewed by the Board'sattorneys. His question, then, was whether it seemed clear that itwould be legal for the System to undertake such operations.Chairman Martin replied that the matter would have to be goneinto more extensively than it had thus far. However, in one form oranother, he thought it could be said that the operations would be legal.The Chairman then turned to Mr. Hackley, who commented that legal questions 9/12/61 -48-had, of course, been raised in the past. Nearly 30 years ago, asindicated in Mr. Young's memorandum, the Board took a position, whichit did not publish, that would seem to preclude the implementation ofa program such as suggested. However, for reasons that did not needto be gone into today, he felt that the Board could well reinterpretthe law in a somewhat different manner, and in his view such a stepwould be desirable.In a further comment, Mr. Hackley recalled that in 1954 a reviewof the matter had been made by the staff. While no formal opinion hadbeen submitted, he thought the views of Counsel for the Board and theNew York Bank were in general agreement.Chairman Martin then stated that he had mentioned this subjectinformally--not formally--to the Chairmen of the Senate and HouseBanking and Currency Committees, but without any indication as towhether or not the Federal Reserve might go into this kind of operation.He did not think it would be fair to say that the Committee Chairmenwere either for or against the idea, but they were sympathetic to theproblem. He had made no effort to press the point, and it would notbe fair to say that the Committee Chairmen had given any clearance ofany kind.The Chairman went on to comment that what had been done throughthe Stabilization Fund was well known; some of the information was nowpublic property. He thought it important to bring out that in the public 9/12/61 -49-mind, and in the mind of the Congress, there was a general idea thatthese were operations of the Federal Reserve. A distinction could bemade, of course, in Federal Reserve circles, but in the public mindno such distinction was made. The average commentator and the man onthe outside, at least those he had encountered, had the impressionthat while these things might be done through the Stabilization Fund,the Federal Reserve was involved. However, there was a very real point,as he had already indicated, that the primary direction must come fromthe Treasury and that anything done by the Federal Reserve must becoordinated with the Treasury.The Chairman also said he did not think that these operationswould involve anything in the way of substantial losses, if one wantedto put the matter in those terms. The Federal Reserve might engage inforeign exchange operations on a fairly substantial scale and actuallymake some money. Whatever losses it might incur would not, in hisopinion, be of any serious nature; otherwise, he would not want toconsider the matter at all. Everyone, Chairman Martin suggested, oughtto keep in mind what the framework was. Also, before entering into anysuch operations, the System ought to do as the memorandum from Mr. Youngsuggested; namely, take the matter up formally with the Chairmen of theBanking and Currency Committees.Mr. Bopp said that as nearly as he could recall the StabilizationFund originally was in the order of $2 billion and one reason for its 9/12/61 -50-creation was dissatisfaction with the idea of the Federal Reservehandling foreign exchange operations. In many countries, he noted,the central bank does actually deal in foreign exchange, so in a sensethe situation in this country was unique. Through the StabilizationFund, however, the Treasury was to have the authority in case of anyconflict. Then, as he recalled it, at the time of the Bretton WoodsAgreements the Stabilization Fund was reduced to something like itspresent size, one reason being to cut down the power of the Treasury.At least, that was the general thinking. In the longer run, he noted,a possible conflict between Treasury policy and Federal Reserve policyin this area could develop. This was a thing to keep in mind inconsidering the basis on which any program would be entered into; thatis, the sense in which the Treasury could direct Federal Reserve operationsin this field even though Federal Reserve funds were used.Chairman Martin called upon Mr. Young for comment in the lightof Mr. Bopp's remarks, and Mr. Young noted that the motivations incutting down the size of the Stabilization Fund had been varied, onereason having been to provide funds to make up the United Statescontribution to the resources of the International Monetary Fund. Headded that there were admittedly various possibilities and hazards inthe institutional relations that would be involved. On the other hand,over a period of time the Federal Reserve had had well-established workingrelationships with the Treasury in the international area through the 9/12/61 -51-National Advisory Council. At times, there might be differences ofview that could become rather sharp. However, he felt the wholebackground was such that these things could be dealt with as theyarose, and that solutions could be worked out without any such matterdeveloping into a monumental issue that would become public property.Mr. Bopp then commented that he was sympathetic to the approachsuggested in Mr. Young's memorandum, following which Mr. Balderstonasked Mr. Young to comment further on the question that had been raisedby Mr. Bopp concerning the direction over the use of Federal Reservefunds.Mr. Young replied that he assumed the Federal Reserve would havecontrol over its own funds. There would be consultation on matters ofpolicy, but he could not imagine that the Federal Reserve would beconfronted with any problem of directives at any time.Mr. Robertson said that he would not want to leave the legalquestion in a posture where one could be misled into thinking that theFederal Reserve could just move ahead. While he would not want to arguethat the proposed operations would be illegal, he thought that the pointwas highly questionable. A great deal of work should be done on research-ing the 1932 period and activities before that date to determine theintent of the statute itself. He then referred to the language of thesixth paragraph of section 14 of the Federal Reserve Act and noted theproblem of construction presented by that language. A study of thelegislative history, he felt, should help to clarify the point. 9/12/61 -52-In further comments, Mr. Robertson said it seemed to him thiswhole problem was not fundamentally the problem of the Federal Reserve,but rather of the Treasury. If so, Federal Reserve operations of thekind suggested might be construed as bailing out the Treasury. Itmight be said that the Stabilization Fund was not adequate and thereforethe Federal Reserve was supplying supplementary funds. Accordingly,before any operations were undertaken, he felt that the Congress shouldhave a chance to take a look, at least through the Banking and CurrencyCommittees, to see whether it was felt that the Federal Reserve had thepower to proceed. In saying this, he was not questioning the desirabilityof action, along the lines suggested, by someone, whether the TreasuryDepartment or the Treasury and State Departments or the Federal Reserveworking closely with the Treasury. He noted, however, that in othercountries there was a much closer relationship between the central bankand the executive branch of the Government than in this country. Inshort, he would not like to see the Federal Reserve Act hastily. Instead,he felt that the subject should be explored fully to be sure that theFederal Reserve was making whatever contribution it could to a long-termproblem. While this problem did exist, he would not want to see theFederal Reserve take the position that it could construe the statute inany way it wished.Mr. Hackley said he agreed with Mr. Robertson that the legalquestion involved was certainly debatable. He suggested that it might 9/12/61 -53-be advisable to furnish the Committee a memorandum which would dealnot only with the question specifically mentioned by Mr. Robertson butalso other problems involved in the program, such as the relationshipbetween the jurisdictions of the Board and the Open Market Committeeand the delegation of authority to a subcommittee of the Open MarketCommittee. Several questions were involved that the Open MarketCommittee might wish to have in mind before consulting committees ofthe Congress.Chairman Martin concurred in the view that it would be desirablefor the Open Market Committee to have such a memorandum.Mr. Swan said that he had in mind somewhat the same kind ofquestions that had already been raised. He did not quarrel with thegeneral approach--the general solution to this kind of problem--but hehad some questions about the use of the Stabilization Fund versusFederal Reserve action. One was the question of authority as such,as contrasted with intermediate decisions. Another question relatedto the amounts involved, and whether the Federal Reserve in effectwould be supplementing a limit that had not been raised and would windup with much larger holdings than those of the Stabilization Fund.Also, in the area of actual operating techniques there was the questionwhether there would be any differences between operations of the FederalReserve and the Treasury or whether they would of necessity be consistent.Further, there was the question of any differences in motives. He hadnoticed, for example, in the distributed material that the Stabilization 9/12/61 -54-Fund had certain amounts committed under existing stabilization agree-ments with Latin American countries, whereas presumably Federal Reserveoperations would not involve such uses of funds. If these variousaspects of the matter could be spelled out, he felt that this wouldhelp to clarify the issues.Mr. Wayne commented that perhaps the System could satisfy itselfon the legal question. However, he had grave doubts about the desirabilityof embarking on a program in which the Federal Reserve would attempt toprotect itself against the risk of loss. He did not see how the FederalReserve could operate as an equal with other central banks and stipulatethat other countries must protect its holdings against loss or it wouldnot play the game. He would favor moving ahead, however, if the legaland related questions could be resolved.In response to a request of the Chairman for his reaction to thecomment in Mr. Young's memorandum concerning the change in conditionsbetween the time of Senator Glass and today, Mr. Wayne said he thoughtthere was generally a changed attitude. He went on to remark, however,that working relationships with the Treasury were currently of such asatisfactory nature that one might tend to assume their continuationindefinitely. In his opinion, that was a dangerous assumption. Also,he would be rather reluctant to have the Federal Reserve go into foreignexchange operations on the basis of even formal consultation withCongressional committees in any off-the-record session. While it wouldbe unfortunate to have prolonged Congressional debate, at the same time 9/12/61 -55-he would feel much more comfortable if the Federal Reserve had anofficial commitment from the Congress that operations of the kindunder consideration were clearly within its power. As he had said,it was his view that the Federal Reserve, if it moved in, would haveto accept the inherent risks. As long as the System made money fromthe operations it would be applauded, but if it should lose money itwould be criticized. If it came to that point, he would prefer thatthe Federal Reserve be criticized for operations that the Congress haddetermined to be legal,Mr. King said that, as he saw it, the great danger in the wholeprocess was that people would be likely to put too much reliance onthese operations to guard the dollar, thus distracting the attentionof the public and the Congress from the need for taking measures thatwould really do the job. In other words, such operations might providea false sense of security. However, he believed that such a programwas likely to be engaged in, and that the question was who would do thejob. On behalf of the Federal Reserve, it might be said that it wouldbe a good thing if the decisions in such a program were removed frompolitics. On the other hand, the diffusion of responsibility fordecisions within the System framework might present a practical problem.In the type of operation under consideration, he envisaged that quickdecisions would frequently be required, and that difficulties would ariseif it was necessary to offer explanations or seek advice from a large group. 9/12/61 -56-For this reason, he might be inclined to lean toward letting theCongress do what it wanted to do through the Stabilization Fund.Mr. Bryan said that while he would not want to take a firmposition at the present time, it seemed to him this was fundamentallywhat might be called in another context a price stabilization attempt.One can always win an argument in any price stabilization effort, henoted, by assuming the stabilization procedures to be equilibratingand ignoring the possibility that they might be disequilibrating.Before embarking on a program of the kind mentioned, he would like tosee a careful analysis made of the kinds of situations where it wasenvisaged that the Federal Reserve would or would not intervene.Damage could easily be done in situations that could not be remediedby the same means; and the operations would be essentially disequili-brating rather than equilibrating in their end effects. Therefore, hewould urge caution.Mr. Allen said he thought Mr. Wayne, Mr. King, and Mr. Bryanhad expressed his own thinking at the present time. With the world theway it was at the present time, somebody was going to do this. However,he had some doubt about the legality of Federal Reserve operations and,like Mr. Wayne, he would not be comfortable, if he had the responsibilityfor a decision, about consulting a few members of the Congress. He wasinclined to think that the intent of Congress had been, and perhaps wasnow, to have the Stabilization Fund do this job. He was also inclinedto feel that the handling of the matter through that mechanism should beencouraged. 9/12/61 -57-Chairman Martin commented that this was about where he hadcome out earlier. However, he felt that the Federal Reserve must bepositive in its approach to this subject. The present Under Secretaryof the Treasury for Monetary Affairs had done some real pioneeringwork in this field, and he (Chairman Martin) was sure that this kindof thing was going to go forward. One might say that it would be ineffect a price stabilization effort. Nevertheless, he felt sure thatsomebody was going to undertake it, and he would dislike to see theFederal Reserve get in the posture of not contributing what it couldin the way of advice and consultation to the development of the soundestpossible method of handling the matter. Perhaps the Treasury would wantto obtain enlargement of the Stabilization Fund. However, even in hislimited contacts thus far, one of the first questions he had been askedby Senators and Congressmen was whether the Federal Reserve approvedor disapproved. In other words, they wanted to know the Federal Reserve'sopinion. In the circumstances, he considered it vital that the Systemnot just stay on the outside and say nothing. Even if the System shouldconclude that it was not the proper organization to handle this functionand that the matter should be handled by the Stabilization Fund, hewould hope that the Federal Reserve could get together material thatwould support the Treasury in the enlargement of the Stabilization Fundrather than just take a negative position, particularly when the Systemwas already regarded in the public eye as being involved in theseoperations. 9/12/61 -58-In further comments, Chairman Martin repeated that he thoughtit was important for the System to reach a position on this subject.The problem must be thought through carefully, and a good start hadbeen made in the memoranda that had been distributed. There was, forexample, the question of the prospective magnitude of operations.While he had talked with only a few Senators and Congressmen, that wasa question they immediately had asked.Chairman Martin then suggested that the Committee might wantto ask the Board's Division of International Finance to continue thework it had been doing recently under the leadership of Mr. Young, who,he noted, was now representing the System at the working party levelof the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. If thissuggestion were followed, the Division would be expected to go aheadand pull the thing together, with the help of the Federal Reserve Bankof New York and others, so that the System could proceed to take apositive position. This would avoid the criticism that the Systemnever contributed anything constructive, that it was against everything,and that there was nothing positive in its role. The System should notlet itself get placed in such a position.Chairman Martin went on to say that he had had a chance tothink on some aspects of the matter during his trip to Europe earlierthis year. He expected to attend the meeting of the Organization forEconomic Cooperation and Development in the latter part of October and, 9/12/61 -59-as he had said, Mr. Young was attending all of the working partymeetings. However, the System must try to pull this together inconcrete form and if possible make some suggestions to the Treasuryas to whether, for example, the Stabilization Fund should be enlargedtwo or three times. Then the System could determine whether or notit would be desirable for the Federal Reserve to be part of thisprogram. It could let the Congress make that decision, but the Systemshould not just sit by idly and let the problem swirl around it. That,he thought, was what had been happening to a degree.Mr. King said that he had not intended his comments to benegative. However, he did feel that some person must make the decisionsin connection with such a program and that the decisions must be clear-cutand fast. If it were decided to delegate the authority to some one personin the System, he would have no objection to such delegation and wouldendorse the idea.Mr. Treiber commented that he thought there were two types ofdecisions. First, there was the extent to which the Federal Reservewould conduct some operations in a certain foreign currency. Secondthere were the day-to-day operating decisions. Essentially, the samething was involved in the day-to-day decisions of the Trading Desk inconducting open market operations.Mr. King asked Mr. Treiber if he would not envisage, then, moredifficulty than in making open market decisions, and Mr. Treiber repliedthat he would not. 9/12/61 -60-Mr. Wayne commented, by way of clarification of his earlierremarks, that he would favor entering into such a program, but withfull recognition of the risks involved.Mr. Rouse commented on the degree of urgency that he saw in thematter. With the kind of international tension that existed at present,somebody must do this kind of thing, and he thought there was a timeelement involved in the sense of being ready, whether through theStabilization Fund or the Federal Reserve. The Stabilization Fundresources were clearly inadequate to do the kind of job that mighthave to be done.Chairman Martin responded that he thought Mr. Rouse's statementwas well taken. There was a real question of urgency, and that was whyhe had suggested that the problem should be gotten in the works. On theother hand, he felt that the System should not move too fast, althoughit should be on top of the problem. He added the comment that the workdone by the Under Secretary of the Treasury in this field had been anexcellent pioneering piece of work. The Under Secretary had shownvision and capacity in improvising with the tools ,t his command; andhad demonstrated how real the need was and how effectively, under certaincircumstances, the problem could be handled, but only on a bridge ofsound policies. In his opinion, the foreign exchange field was one inwhich the country had been fortunate in having the type of leadershipthat had existed in the Treasury. He hoped the System would think theproblem through and be as constructive as possible. 9/12/61 -61-Mr. King indicated that he had some concern about the idea ofoperations being conducted in two different forms and raised thequestion whether they should not preferably be concentrated, with oneagency directing the entire effort.Mr. Young pointed out in this connection that the Treasury hasother jobs in connection with the Stabilization Fund. That was one ofthe reasons why the funds available for the particular kind of operationsunder discussion were so limited. He gathered that the Treasury might behappy if it were left free to use the Stabilization Fund for the otherthings with which it had to deal.Chairman Martin then suggested that the Committee requestMr. Young and the Division of International Finance to work with theNew York Reserve Bank and the Board's Legal Division in trying to pullthe parts of the problem together, and agreement with this suggestionwas indicated.It was agreed that the next meeting of the Open Market Committeewould be held on Tuesday, October 3, 1961, and that the next succeedingmeeting would be tentatively scheduled for Tuesday, October 24, 1961.The meeting then adjourned.Secretary. TOTAL RESERVES AVAILABLE TO SUPPORT PRIVATE DEPOSIT EXPANSION, SEASONALLY ADJUSTEDACTUAL VS. 5 PER CENT AND 3 PER CENT ANNUAL GROWTH RATES, MARCH 1 -SEPTEMBER 6, 1961ANNUAL GROWTH RATE.SINCE MARCH 1 BASE 9.4AVAILABLE RESERVES19.13 PER CENTANNUAL GROWTH RATESINCE MARCH 1 BASE9.0