 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Systemin Washington on Tuesday, January 9, 1962, at 10:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Martin, ChairmanMr. BalderstonMr. IronsMr. KingMr. MillsMr. MitchellMr. RobertsonMr. ShepardsonMr. SwanMr. WayneMr. Fulton, AlternateMr. Treiber, Alternate for Mr. HayesMessrs. Ellis and Deming, Alternate Members ofthe Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Bopp, Bryan, and Clay, Presidents ofthe Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,Atlanta, and Kansas City, respectivelyMr. Young, SecretaryMr. Sherman, Assistant SecretaryMr. Kenyon, Assistant SecretaryMr. Hackley, General CounselMr. Thomas, EconomistMessrs. Baughman, Coldwell, Einzig, Garvy,and Noyes, Associate EconomistsMr. Rouse, Manager, System Open Market AccountMr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMessrs. Holland and Koch, Advisers, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Furth, Adviser, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMr. Knipe, Consultant to the Chairman, Board ofGovernorsMr. Yager, Chief, Government Finance Section,Division of Research and Statistics, Boardof Governors 1/9/62 -2-Mr. Broida, Economist, Government FinanceSection, Division of Research and Statistics,Board of GovernorsMr. Francis, First Vice President, FederalReserve Bank of St. LouisMr. Hickman, Senior Vice President, FederalReserve Bank of ClevelandMessrs. Eastburn, Jones, and Tow, Vice Presidentsof the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,St. Louis, and Kansas City, respectivelyMessrs. Stone, Black,and Brandt, Assistant VicePresidents of the Federal Reserve Banks ofNew York, Richmond, and Atlanta, respectivelyMr. Willis, Economic Adviser, Federal ReserveBank of BostonMr. Sternlight, Manager, SecuritiesDepartment, Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkMr. Hellweg, Economist, Federal Reserve Bank ofMinneapolisBefore this meeting there had been distributed to the membersof the Committee a report of open market operations covering the periodDecember 19, 1961, through January 3, 1962, and a supplementary reportcovering the period January 4 through January 8, 1962. Copies of bothreports have been placed in the files of the Committee.In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Rouse made thefollowing comments:In our operations since the last meeting of the Committee, wehave tried to maintain reasonable continuity and stability in themoney market in a period beset by unusual holiday and year-endgyrations. Under the circumstances, we were necessarily guidedmainly by the feel of the market. The three-month bill rateworked to the upper part of the 2-1/2 -2-3/4 per cent rangeuntil yesterday, when it moved up further to 2.82 per cent inreflection of the Treasury bill auctions yesterday and today.The Federal funds rate was quite firm through the first half ofthe period, holding at the 3 per cent "ceiling" for severalconsecutive days between Christmas and New Year, but it has 1/9/62 -3-since receded to a 2 -2-3/4 per cent range. At the same time,the weekly figures published on free reserves have been such asto give no overt indication to the public of a significant shiftin policy. Estimated total reserves substantially exceededthe hypothetical projections that have been developed by theBoard staff, largely because of special--and apparentlytemporary--year-end factors. In view of the pressures alreadyapparent in the money market, it would have been impracticableto attempt to hold total reserves down to the hypotheticalprojected levels.The Treasury's announcement on January 3 of its cashfinancing plans also resulted in upward pressure on bill rates,since the market has been concerned that more bills might be issuedin its second cash offering, expected to be announced nextThursday. The Treasury has been unwilling to confine its rangeof choice by indicating to the market that it would do itssecond job outside the bill area.Another unsettling influence on short rates has been thesituation in negotiable time certificates of deposit. So farthe largest banks, whose certificates trade freely and commandthe lowest rates, have not, with one exception that we know of,gone beyond 3-1/8 per cent for six months and 3-1/4 per centfor one year. Very few new certificates have been issued atthese rates in New York. The First National Bank of Chicagohas been aggressive in offering certificates at 3-1/4 per centfor six months and 3-1/2 per cent for one year, but has notissued many so far. The only other banks now offering comparablerates are those whose certificates are not competitive with thebest names. The outcome of the Treasury's auction today, andof the second cash offering, for which the books will probablyopen next Monday, will have a further bearing on the timecertificate situation. Rate competition from Treasury billsand other instruments, as well as between the large banks, mayeventually result in an upward revision in the rates.As to the market for longer-term issues, the atmospherecontinues to reflect basic caution despite a somewhat betterfeeling which has resulted from an improvement in the corporateand municipal markets and a related belief that rates will notnecessarily move sharply higher in the near future. The calendarof forthcoming new corporate issues is moderate until the $300million A.T. & T. issue in the middle of February; the municipalcalendar is more substantial.The Treasury seems inclined to offer a coupon issue in itsnew cash financing to be announced Thursday, possibly a reopening 1/9/62 -4-of an outstanding issue of notes or intermediate bonds. Paymentfor the issue will be on January 23, after which there will bea gap of a week before a decision will be made on the $11 billionFebruary refunding.Thereupon, upon motion duly made andseconded, the open market transactionsduring the period December 19, 1961,through January 8, 1962, were approved,ratified, and confirmed.Mr. Noyes presented the following statement with respect toeconomic developments:The professional pessimist can still ply his trade byspeculating as to whether the world will end in the bang ofa fireball or the whimper of fallout, but there can be littlequestion that 1961 ended on a stentorian note. While this wasevident in almost every sector, the most spectacular improve-ments around the year end were in retail trade and unemployment.Retail sales, which had fluctuated in a narrow range earlier inthe recovery, moved up vigorously in October and November.Department store sales were at a record 157 per cent of the1947-49 average, and trade reports suggest further improvementin the nonautomotive group in December--but perhaps not enoughto carry the total up further in the face of the drop in autosales from the advanced 7 million annual rate in November to a6.1 million rate in December.Unemployment in December held at the 6.1 per cent levelreported for November--a favorable sign when one considers thesize of the drop from October to November and the persistenceof near 7 per cent rates earlier in the year.We are still uncertain as to whether industrial productionin December will be up 1 or 2 points, but an increase to 115 or116 seems assured.Like auto sales, total construction activity receded fromthe advanced November rate, but it was still at a high leveland within the total private residential construction continuedto advance.We are estimating GNP for the fourth quarter at $542 billion--a gain of $16 billion, or 3 per cent, from the third quarter. Asindicated by the rise in retail sales, the striking feature ofthe improvement in this quarter was the fact that it involved asizeable increase in final takings, as well as a somewhat higherrate of inventory accumulation. 1/9/62 -5-Consumer credit extensions picked up sharply in October andNovember, primarily as a result of improved auto sales. The netaddition to outstandings in December is not likely to be solarge, but there will probably be some further increase, placingthe fourth quarter in sharp contrast to the first nine months oflittle change.Generally, prices have remained stable. The consumer priceindex declined by an insignificant amount in November and thereis a possibility that December may show another small decline.If anything, sensitive commodity prices appear to have edged upa little since I reported to the Committee three weeks ago, butthey are still below their level at the end of November.Common stock prices have declined rather sharply since theturn of the year, despite the more optimistic appraisal of theover-all outlook and the prospects for corporate profits. However,the rally late yesterday afternoon may mark the end of this decline.The widespread expectation is that the President willpropose a balanced budget in his message to the Congress laterthis month--a not inconsiderable increase in expenditures beingoffset, along with the deficit in the current fiscal year, bya sizeable increase in revenues stemming from expanded economicactivity. Meanwhile, improved sales and profits in the fourthquarter have probably already moved Government expenditures andreceipts on an income and product account basis close to balance.No commentary on the economic situation at the turn of theyear would be complete without some mention of the record expansionof bank credit--and especially of bank loans in December. The $775million increase in business loans at city banks, which substantiallyexceeded the gain in any corresponding period, was taken by manyobservers as the strongest evidence to date that we have moved outof the period of recovery into the expansionary phase of the cycle.Certainly, the increased willingness and capacity of borrowers isfurther evidence of the strength of the upward thrust.There seems to be universal agreement that the most importantsingle threat to continued orderly economic expansion at thepresent time is the situation surrounding the expiration of thesteelworkers' contract at mid-year. Not only the possibility ofa prolonged strike but inventory accumulation in anticipation ofeither a strike or a substantial upward price adjustment couldhave a damaging effect on the unusually good balance which hasmarked the recovery to date. So far, there has been quite abit of talk about inventory build-up, but little evidence thatphysical inventory is actually being taken on in large amountsrelative to current consumption. Recent reports that steelorders have leveled out at fairly high rates suggest more of a"wait and see" attitude for the moment than a scramble to buildup stocks. 1/9/62In summary, one might say on the one hand that neither marketconditions nor current rates of material and human resource utiliza-tion suggest an imminent inflationary situation. On the other hand,the rate of expansion in the fourth quarter does not seem to callfor further autonomous stimulation of the economy in the form ofrapid credit expansion.In these circumstances, it is difficult to say what sort ofa policy with respect to credit and monetary expansion would beconducive to orderly and sustainable growth. Even if one does notagree with those who argue that it is always a wise policy to letmarket forces reflect themselves against the background of asteady moderate rate of growth in bank reserves, such a policywould seem to have much to recommend it in the present situation.Mr. Mitchell inquired whether the ratio of retail sales, seasonallyadjusted, to disposable personal income was high or low in November andDecember relative to previous standards, to which Mr. Noyes replied thatin the first nine months of the year retail sales were low by historicalstandards in relation to disposable personal income. In October andNovember the ratio moved up, although not to anything approaching thelevels that prevailed in the early 1950's.Mr. Thomas presented the following statement with respect tocredit developments:In recent weeks credit markets have been dominated by holidayand year-end credit demands, which were even larger than usual.Bank credit increased sharply and, although the volume of availablereserves increased substantially as a result of market factors,the supply was not enough to meet demands. Member banks increasedtheir borrowings at the Reserve Banks and in the Federal fundsmarket, and short-term money rates rose somewhat to the highestlevels since mid-1960. Long-term bond yields, after rising inNovember or early December, were faily steady during the pastthree weeks.Publicly-offered new capital issues have been in relativelysmall volume, but there was a substantial volume of privateplacements of corporate securities during December. Prospects 1/9/62 -7-are that offerings both of corporate and of State and localgovernment issues will continue seasonally light in January.Capital markets have been influenced, however, by the announcementthat the A.T. & T. Corporation will offer $300 million of newsecurities for cash in February. Common stock prices, afterreaching new high levels early in December, have declined markedlyduring the past two weeks for reasons not yet evident, unless itis that they had risen too much in terms of prospects for profits.The most striking recent credit development was the largeincrease in bank credit during December. The expansion in bankloans was close to or above the record increase in December 1960.The increase seems to have been concentrated at city banks to aneven larger extent than is usual for December. Loans to businessesand to finance companies for tax and other year-end needs increasedsomewhat more than usual, and loans on securities showed largeincreases, as is customary in December. There have also been somefairly large loans by U.S. banks to foreign borrowers. In addition,banks added rather large amounts to their holdings of securities,other than Governments. Although city bank holdings of Treasurybills increased substantially, these increases were largely offsetby declines in holdings of other Government securities.Dealers, after reducing their positions from the high levelsreached in October, showed usual seasonal increases in December.They increased their borrowings--largely at banks--to finance theirenlarged positions.Partial figures for the week ending January 3 indicate thatthe December expansion in bank loans and investments has beenfollowed by a rather large decline at city banks, which may havebeen concentrated principally in New York and Chicago city banks.Notwithstanding this decline, the figures for the past five weeksas a whole generally equal or exceed those for the same periodlast year, which was very high. It will be necessary to observefurther developments in January before determining whether thesharp expansion in December was a transitory development or isindicative of a trend.As a consequence of the bank credit expansion, the moneysupply increased much more than seasonally in December and endedthe year more than 3 per cent larger than a year ago, with anannual rate of increase of over 6 per cent since last August.These figures should be appraised, however, in the light of the7 per cent or more increase in G.N.P. in the past year and of thefact that since mid-1959 the money supply has increased by littleover 1 per cent, while G.N.P. grew by more than 10 per cent. Atthe same time consideration must be given to increases in the 1/9/62 -8-public's holdings of other liquid assets, which have been sub-stantially greater than the money supply growth.U.S. Government deposits at banks also increased in December.The increase in time deposits at commercial banks, however,slackened considerably from the rapid pace of the past year.New York City banks showed a decline in time deposits, otherthan savings accounts, during December. The effect of higherrates on such deposits, which have just become effective at aconsiderable number of banks, remains to be seen.It may reasonably be concluded that further expansion ineconomic activity toward capacity potentials, which are alsogrowing, will require some further expansion in the money supplyand in general liquidity.Growth in deposits has resulted in a greater than seasonalexpansion in required reserves. As shown in the chart in thestaff memorandum, required reserves against private deposits,after adjustment for seasonal variations, reached a very highlevel in the week ending January 3 and, with excess reservesaveraging nearly $750 million, the level of total availablereserves was even higher. Reserves were supplied principallyby an even greater than seasonal increase in float. The holi-day currency demand--net of changes in vault cash of banks--was largely counterbalanced by a return flow of currency tothe banks in the latest week. There was some drain of reservesfrom a gold outflow. Absorption of reserves by System salesin the open market was largely offset by additional memberbank borrowings at the Reserve Banks.These credit developments may be appraised in light of theCommittee's current economic policy directive, which in briefcalls for providing reserves for monetary expansion at a some-what slower rate than in the immediate past, while placingemphasis on continuance of bill rates at close to the top ofthe recent range. It might be said that credit and monetaryexpansion, after adjustment for usual seasonal variations, hasbeen at a faster pace than that indicated in the directive,but this expansion has been based on borrowed reserves, not onreserves supplied by open market operations. Bill rates, as aconsequence of the pressure of credit demands upon reserveavailability, have remained at close to the level indicated.No overt action was taken by the Management to reduce thesupply of reserves below the seasonal pattern or to raise in-terest rates. Thus, in the light of circumstances, the Manage-ment may be said to have conformed to the directive.During the current week, it appears that required reservesare declining considerably more than seasonally and total re-serves are also being reduced by a combination of market factors, 1/9/62 -9-System open market operations, and a sharp reduction in memberbank borrowings.The reductions in required and total reserves this week,however, will not offset all of the excess expansion in requiredreserves in December but may bring total reserves down close tothe projected level based upon a 4 per cent expansion since theend of November.Further seasonal declines in required reserves--aggregatingover $500 million--are to be expected during the next fiveweeks, as well as a substantial return flow of currency duringJanuary. The effects of these additions to reserve availa-bility are likely to be to a large extent offset by a decreasein float from the recent abnormally high level. Because ofsales of securities already effected for System Account, freereserves might amount to around $400 million this week andnext, unless float continues abnormally high.In the last two weeks of January, in the absence of Systemsales or of less than seasonal credit contraction, reserveavailability would increase substantially as a result of marketfactors. In February, March, and April, only moderate week-to-week fluctuations in System operations will be necessary in orderto maintain an adequate supply of reserves for further growth inthe economy.In view of the rapid credit and monetary expansion thatoccurred in the past month, the generally more optimistic views asto economic prospects, and the continued threat of internationaldrains of dollars, some restraint in supplying additional reservesseems appropriate at this time, particularly if credit demandsshould remain strong. But further credit and monetary expansionat a moderate pace is certainly desirable. If contraction shouldexceed usual seasonal amounts in the next few weeks, then restraintswould not be proper, unless needed to prevent a decline in interestrates that would lead to an outflow of funds abroad and a loss ofgold.It is suggested that, in view of the continued potentialfor expansion in the domestic economy and in the absence ofevidence of speculative excesses, a policy of supplying reservesthrough open market operations in amounts adequate to supporta 3 per cent per annum rate of expansion in the money supply,plus a somewhat faster rate of increase in time deposits atmember banks, if that should occur, would probably not be excessive.In fact, a somewhat more rapid rate of expansion might be desirable,but if forces in the economy are strong enough to call for suchan increase, the additional reserves needed could be obtainedthrough member-bank borrowing. If, on the other hand, speculativeor unsustainable credit demands develop, then interest rates can 1/9/62 -10-be permitted to rise and the discount rate should be increased.But, as yet, the evidence does not point to the need for any suchovert restrictive action.Mr. Furth presented the following statement with regard to thebalance of payments:Once more, there has been no significant change in theinternational position of the United States. Preliminaryand fragmentary figures for December confirm our pessimisticforecast: net transfers of gold, foreign convertible cur-rencies, and liquid dollar assets to foreigners have remainedin the neighborhood of $500 million, as in the two precedingmonths, although December usually brings a substantial sea-sonal improvement in view of year-end debt payments of foreigncountries to the U. S. Treasury of about $200 million.As a result, the net transfers for the fourth quarterprobably were around $1.5 billion, as against $0.9 billion inthe third quarter and $1.2 billion in the fourth quarter of1960. The deterioration remains if we consider only thosepayments that are considered part of the so-called basicbalance, i.e., payments on current account and on long-termcapital account, and if we eliminate extraordinary transac-tions, such as U. S. subscriptions to international agencies.The most disappointing aspect of the picture is thesteadiness of the deterioration since last summer. Thegloom is relieved by only three mildly encouraging features.First, in sharp contrast to 1960, most if not allrecent net dollar transfers accrued to foreign privaterather than official accounts; the year-end figures areaffected by the usual window-dressing of European commercialbanks and may give a different impression, but the rapidoutflow of foreign funds from the Fed into the market duringthe first week of January indicates a continuation of thetrend to private rather than official accrual.Second, in consequence of that trend most major foreign coun-tries have abstained from converting their dollar gains into gold.The net decline in our gold stock was kept to $500 million, abouthalf of the corresponding amount in the fourth quarter of last year,although more than the total in the first three quarters of 1961.Third, it seems that the recent deterioration did not orig-inate on trade account. Our figures are still too fragmentary topermit reliable analysis; but--unless figures for December springan unpleasant surprise--the trade surplus was probably higher inthe fourth than in the third quarter. 1/9/62 -11-While an increase in capital outflow or in Government expen-ditures abroad affects the liquidity position of the United Statesas seriously as would a deficit on trade account, the differenceis important for two reasons. First, insofar as the deficit isdue to a rise in U. S. investment abroad, it does not diminishthe real wealth of the U. S. economy; and second, policy measuresaimed at reducing an excessive outflow of private capital or ofpublic funds are not as likely to hurt recovery and growth in theU. S. economy as might the measures designed to reduce, drasticallyand immediately, a deficit on trade account.However, the longer the deficit persists, the harsher will bethe measures needed to correct it.Chairman Martin commented that he had in mind that the Committeewould meet again in two weeks. He noted that the Treasury was expectedto announce its second cash offering this Thursday and that the problemof the Treasury during the period immediately ahead would have to be bornein mind as comments were made during today's discussion.Mr. Treiber then presented the following statement of hisviews on the business outlook and credit policy:The contrast between the favorable domestic outlook and theincreasingly serious balance-of-payments position has become evenmore striking since the last meeting. The December balance-of-payments deficit now shows no real improvement over the hugeNovember figure. For the fourth quarter we are likely to see anear-record deficit of over $6 billion at a seasonally adjustedannual rate. This would imply a 1961 balance-of-payments deficitof over $3 billion (exclusive of special debt repayments), onlya minor improvement over 1960.The domestic economy continues to be moving ahead at areasonably good pace. Over-all prices continue to be relativelystable. Unemployment, despite the recent improvement, continuesto be a serious problem.The bank credit expansion in December appears to have beeneven stronger than in November. Total bank credit rose substantiallyin December, as business loans and consumer loans expanded vigor-ously. Bank liquidity remains high. The money supply has risenabout 3 per cent in the last year. 1/9/62During 1961 the Federal Reserve provided the bankingsystem with ample reserves. With the expansion of thedomestic economy and bank credit, the Federal Reserve shouldslow down in the provision of reserves. However, with littlesign of imminent inflationary pressures from the demand sideand with considerable unused resources, there is nothing inour domestic situation calling for a substantial change incredit policy at this time.But what about the international factors? Our adversebalance of payments is due to a combination of factors includ-ing large payments abroad for military purposes, economic aidto underdeveloped countries, and movements of capital funds,especially large amounts of short-term funds. Our good tradesurplus is not good enough to offset these other large items.The solution of the problem involves not only monetary andfiscal policy; it involves the whole gamut of policies, bothGovernmental and private, that affect our economic and finan-cial life, Monetary policy can help, but it cannot do thewhole job. Monetary policy should not try to do the whole job,and we should not get into a position in which the publicthinks it can. Monetary policy has its most discernible short-run influence on the movement of funds.U. S. policy should, of course, be aimed not merely atstopping an outflow of short-term funds, but also at bringingabout a return flow. An increase in short-term interest ratesin the United States, even though the increase be modest,could help to buttress our balance-of-payments position andprotect our gold stock.The substantial differential between U. S. interest ratesand the higher rates abroad, particularly in Britain, providesa clear incentive to move or divert funds to Europe or toCanada on an uncovered basis for those who have no fear thatthe foreign currency will soon be devalued. It is not possibleto tell the extent to which uncovered funds have moved or havebeen diverted abroad. Some of the shifts have not necessarilybeen just for short-term investment but have involved the so-calledleads and lags, i.e., movements by those needing a foreign cur-rency sometime in the future, either for direct investment or forthe settlement of commercial and other payments.Another factor contributing to the outward flow has beenthe borrowing of funds in the United States at relatively lowinterest rates for use abroad.Every day investors and traders decide whether to hold orborrow more or less dollars. A modest further increase inshort-term interest rates in the United States would be unlikelyto stop completely the outflow of funds or to stimulate aninflow. But investment decisions result from a balancing of-12- 1/9/62profits and risks; and at the margin a small increase in ourrates might, for some investors, tip the balance of advantagesin favor of the United States. The psychological impact ofeven a small increase on the decisions of both private investorsand traders and foreign central banks is even more difficult toestimate, but it would probably be substantial. A small addi-tional increase in the Treasury bill rate could help strengthenconfidence in the dollar.Our difficult international situation counsels some furtherincrease in short-term interest rates in the U. S. On balance,our international financial problem is so severe and our domesticeconomy is so good that some further upward movement in rates isjustified.At the moment, of course, the Treasury is in the midst ofboth refunding and cash financing operations. These operationscall for an even keel in the money market for the time being.But what about the period following such operations? Earlyin the year it is customary for the banks to gain reserves andfor the Federal Reserve to absorb reserves. If credit demandscontinue to be strong, they should be permitted to have theirinfluence in tightening the money market. As market ratesrise, an increase in the discount rate should be considered.An increase in the discount rate would signal to thoseabroad the determination of the U. S. to defend the dollar.We would reap a two fold benefit: first, the advantage of theinfluence of higher rates here on the international flow offunds, and, second, an excellent psychological lift derivedfrom a signal that is well understood by persons abroad. Onthe other hand, too early an increase in the rate is likely tobe interpreted by many in the United States as evidence of thedesire of the Federal Reserve to apply restraint prematurely.We do not think that there should be a change in thediscount rate within the next couple of weeks, but we do thinkthat the System must consider carefully the role that the dis-count rate may play in the coming months in our effort to helpto defend the dollar abroad. For the coming weeks we wouldlike to see a trending toward a slightly less easy monetarycondition, with the rate on three-month Treasury bills at about2-3/4 per cent or somewhat higher.I was glad to hear the Chairman suggest that the next meet-ing of the Committee be held January 23. That will enable theCommittee to view the situation after the conclusion of theTreasury financing now under way and before the Treasuryestablishes the terms of its refunding scheduled for themiddle of February.-13- 1/9/62Pursuant to the action of the Committee at its lastmeeting there are now two directives to the Federal ReserveBank of New York, namely, (1) a continuing authority directiveand (2) a current economic policy directive. The continuingauthority directive appears appropriate. I see no reason tochange it.The current economic policy directive presumably will beprepared after the Committee has developed a consensus as toappropriate policy and its implementation. As I stated earlier,I think that in view of the improved domestic business situa-tion and the concurrent worsening of our balance of payments,our policy should be one of trending toward a less easy mone-tary condition, without overt action, with the three-monthTreasury bill rate at or above 2-3/4 per cent.Presumably, following the discussion this morning, theSecretary, the Manager, and the Economist will prepare for theconsideration of the Committee a draft of current economicpolicy directive on which the Committee will act after lunch.I would like to comment on the current economic policydirective approved by majority vote following the last meetingof the Committee, with the thought that experience in that con-nection may be helpful in preparing the policy directive today.A current economic policy directive is a new venture; we arefeeling our way with respect to its content and use and themethod of its preparation. We understood that the directivewould in effect state the conclusions embodied in the consensusof the meeting. The consensus of the last meeting, as stated bythe Chairman, and approved by a majority of the Committee in themeeting, "was along the lines of concentrating on a bill rate inthe upper part of the range of 2-1/2 -2-3/4 per cent and trend-ing toward a slightly less easy monetary condition. withoutovert action." No mention was made in the statement of the con-sensus of a goal of providing reserves with a somewhat slowerrate of increase in total reserves than during recent months.While I have no doubt that the draftsmen were seeking to clarifythe consensus and its implications, it seems to me that theinclusion of the total reserves concept in the draft of direc-tive sent to Committee members following the meeting could beconstrued, in effect, as a statement of a new consensus ratherthan merely a clarification of a previously expressed consensus.It seems to us that the current economic policy directive shouldset forth as closely as possible the consensus as stated by theChairman and approved by the Committee--perhaps with some re-phrasing to add clarity, but without injecting new tests or newinterpretations.-14- 1/9/62We question the advisability of placing primary emphasison total reserves. We agree that total reserves are an importantconsideration, but among other things they do not reflect theintensity of the use of reserves.Figures on total reserves are unsuitable as day-to-dayguides. While member bank balances at the Reserve Banks areknown each day, the amount of vault cash serving as reservesis known only after some delay. Even if accurate figures ontotal reserves were available immediately, the figures wouldbe helpful over a short period only when adjusted for so-calledseasonal influences. The seasonal adjustments are far fromperfect. The statement week is the basic period for whichmember banks calculate their reserves and take steps to complywith reserve requirements; it is the period used by the FederalReserve in its calculations as to whether to supply or absorbreserves. The statement week, therefore, must be the periodto which seasonal adjustments are applied to total reserves.But the composition of each week shifts slightly from year toyear in terms of the days of the month involved, and this canmake an enormous difference in the light of special dates suchas holidays, tax dates, and so forth. Even where the generaloutline of a seasonal movement is fairly reliable, just a smalldifference in timing can make a large difference in the factorappropriate for a particular week. And the condition of themarket over a period as short as a week, or even part of a week,can be quite important to marginal decisions in the capitalmarkets. In addition to erratic seasonals, the total reservemeasures also suffer from the same short-term volatility thatbesets total bank credit and deposits. The cause might be anabnormal upsurge in Government securities dealers' borrowingsaround a tax date, or a spate of corporate borrowing to makeup for a slowdown in Defense Department progress payments, orany of numerous other causes that would perhaps be identifiablemuch later, if at all.In the light of all these factors it is impossible tomake adequate seasonal adjustments that will produce, overa period as short as a statement week, the correct targetlevel of reserves that the banking system should have. Aneffort to offset the various factors that appear to preventthe attainment of the theoretical figure could produce suchsharp changes in the money market atmosphere as to impedeseriously the smooth flow of credit which is among the primaryresponsibilities of the Federal Reserve System.We have looked back over our experience during the lastyear and have found a number of occasions on which concentra-tion on total reserves would probably have had perverse effects.-15- 1/9/62 -16-At times the close pursuit of a total reserves target could haveled us to withdraw reserves when market conditions were alreadyquite firm, and to supply reserves when market conditions werealready quite easy.I mention these occasions not to discredit the use oftotal reserves as a factor to be considered but to cautionagainst giving them too much weight. They are an appropriateintermediate reference point for the Committee--intermediatebetween a measure such as free reserves, with its close tie tothe immediate money market atmosphere, and a broader measuresuch as total deposits or total bank credit.However useful total reserves may be as a benchmark forthe Committee, such a measure, for reasons mentioned earlier,is not a satisfactory working guide for the Desk in conductingoperations from day to day. I submit that the most satisfactoryand workable guide between meetings is an indication as towhether it is desirable that money market conditions and short-term interest rates continue about the same, or that they trendtoward an easier or less easy condition. Success in pursuingsuch an objective can be tested by the feel of the market asreflected in such factors as the rate on Federal funds, therates on three-month Treasury bills and other securities, theavailability and cost of dealer financing, the amount ofmember bank borrowing, and other related factors. The effectof operations conducted in the light of such guidelines, ontotal reserves and other broad measures, can be observed bythe Committee at each meeting, and the Committee' s instructionscan be adjusted accordingly.Mr. Treiber also said that he was prepared to comment on twoother matters if comments thereon were desired at this point. Thefirst matter had to do with the continuing operating authorities usuallyreaffirmed at the March organization meeting each year, reference towhich had been made at the December 19, 1961, meeting of the Committee.The second matter had to do with the draft of article prepared forinclusion in the Federal Reserve Bulletin concerning the Committee'saction at the December 19 meeting in terminating its three continuing 1/9/62 -17-statements of operating policies. This draft had been distributed tothe Committee with a memorandum from the Secretary dated January 5,1962.Chairman Martin indicated that he felt it would be preferable todefer comments on those matters. For the moment he thought it desirableto consider, in light of the comments made by Mr. Treiber, the currenteconomic policy directive that had been issued following the meetingon December 19. He stated that he would like to have Mr. Young explainthe procedure followed in drafting the directive since, if he understoodcorrectly, Mr. Treiber did not feel that the second paragraph of thedirective reflected the consensus reached at the meeting. The Chairmansaid he considered it important that the Committee be advised as tohow the difference of opinion arose.Mr. Young pointed out that the December 19 meeting was thefirst occasion for the staff group consisting of Mr. Rouse, Mr. Thomas,and himself to experiment with the preparation of a current economicpolicy directive pursuant to the new procedure that the Committee hadagreed upon at that meeting. He noted that various phrases had beenused by individuals around the table in describing the kind of operationsthat they would like to see conducted during the period that was thenimmediately ahead. Some had used phrases such as "a tendency towardless ease"; the New York Bank in particular had stressed this. Othermembers of the Committee had talked in terms of a lesser rate of growth intotal reserves. At the point during the meeting when the consensus wasbeing formulated the question of total reserves was raised and remarks 1/9/62 -18-were made by Mr. Thomas, among others. The consensus was stated generallyin terms of tending toward less ease, and Mr. Shepardson had inquiredwhether the consensus included the objective of a slower rate of growth intotal reserves, indicating that he would interpret it as such. In attempt-ing to draft the current policy directive, at which time the minutesof the meeting were not yet available, there was discussion of the senseof the meeting on the basis of recollections. There was discussion bytelephone with Mr. Rouse in New York as to the meaning of the words thathad been used--the semantics of the problem--and it was argued by Mr.Thomas (and Mr. Young stated that he had concurred) that the expression"less ease" was ambiguous. The point was made that less ease would bebrought about by tending toward a somewhat slower rate of growth ofbank reserves than the Federal Reserve System had theretofore beenencouraging. In the light of that thought, the question was put toMr. Rouse whether it would not be a good idea to include both thoughtsin the draft of directive as alternatives. and Mr. Rouse agreed withthis suggestion. Therefore, this was done in the draft of directive thatwas sent to the members of the Committee. Question then was raised byMr. Hayes, who called Mr. Young by telephone and said he thought thatthe Secretariat had, so to speak, taken advantage of the situation byputting in the telegram first the alternative language that referred totrending toward a somewhat slower rate of increase in total reserves.The other alternative had been placed second in the wire. Mr. Hayes 1/9/62 -19-thought the consensus as expressed at the meeting provided for thelatter alternative only, and Mr. Young had replied that views on theinterpretation of the consensus could differ, but that the Secretariatcould be legitimately criticized for the order of the options in theoutgoing wire. It was the opinion of Mr. Thomas, and also his opinion(Mr. Young's), as against that of Mr. Rouse that the real meaning ofthe consensus was to work toward a slower rate of growth in total re-serves.Mr. Young went on to say that when the views of the Committeemembers were received concerning the language of the draft directive,the majority of the eight members who had agreed at the meeting withthe implementation of policy according to the consensus favored thealternative language providing for a somewhat slower rate of increasein total reserves than during recent months. The two who favored thesecond alternative choice of language were Mr. Hayes and Mr. Swan. Thiswas reported by Mr. Young to Mr. Hayes, including the fact that mostof the replies had taken explicit note of the two alternatives presented,and the latter agreed that in the circumstances the Secretary had nooption but to send the directive to the New York Bank in the form inwhich it was now recorded in the minutes of the meeting on December 19,1961.Mr. Treiber commented that he had not been trying to be criticalof the way in which the situation had developed. A new procedure was 1/9/62 -20-involved, and everyone concerned was feeling his way. Instead, hisstatement was intended to bring out the view that for a day-to-dayguide to the Desk it was preferable to say "stay about where we are"or "less ease" because such expressions were more helpful than torefer to a factor such as the rate of growth of total reserves. AsMr. Thomas had pointed out in his statement today, total reserves hadvaried several hundred million dollars from the projections because ofspecial factors.Mr. Thomas commented that every objection Mr. Treiber hadraised to total reserves would apply to net free reserves and also tothe feel of the market. As Mr. Bryan had pointed out at the December19 meeting, the objectives of the Committee should be stated in terms ofwhat the System could control, rather than what it could not control.It could not control other factors supplying reserves in the market orthe demand for credit, which would determine whether there was less ormore ease or lower or higher interest rates.Mr. Mitchell commented that the directive must be expressed interms of what the Manager thought he could do. If he understood correctly,Mr. Treiber had said that the Manager could not operate under the formulacontained in the current economic policy directive issued following theDecember 19 meeting.Mr. Rouse commented that the past three weeks had provided arather clear-cut example of a situation where total reserves could not be 1/9/62 -21-used as a guide. If they had been used as a guide, this would haveresulted in overt action in the market. There would have been sucha tight situation as to have had an adverse effect on the price ofGovernment securities, with the public thinking that there had been aclear-cut shift in System credit policy. It would have been necessaryto take $300 or $400 million of reserves out of the market to conformto the terms of the directive as far as total reserves were concerned.An extreme situation had developed as the result of special factors.Had the Desk gone along with the total reserve objective, as stated inthe directive, that would have accentuated the situation. If the Deskhad taken out of the market the amouht of reserves that the totalreserve concept suggested, this would have had a drastic effect on marketprices.Mr. Thomas noted that the Desk did take $300 million of reservesout of the market by open market operations in the past period, and thatthose were replaced by member bank borrowing. If the Manager had triedin this period to maintain free reserves at something like the levelindicated, he would have followed a mistaken policy of feeding theeconomy. Instead, the Manager let free reserves decline and let thebanks obtain any additional reserves they wanted to obtain by borrowing.The Desk did the job of following the directive, even though this putfree reserves below the level implied by some of the comments at theDecember 19 Committee meeting. 1/9/62 -22-Chairman Martin then commented that it would be well for every-one to have a chance to study Mr. Treiber's statement. There were boundto be difficulties as the Committee got into the new procedure adoptedat the December 19 meeting. Words had different meanings to differentpeople around the table. However, it should be emphasized, in regardto the new procedure, that the Committee ought to try to do its bestto get a consensus. The New York Bank had rendered a service by makingavailable the paper presented by Mr. Treiber. At the same time, theCommittee should not get too sticky about words unless it knew preciselywhat it was doing. It would hardly be possible to have anythingwritten exactly in the way that would suit each individual best.Mr. King said that the experience cited by Messrs. Treiberand Young illustrated the advisability of formulating the currenteconomic policy directive and voting on it before each meeting adjourned.Chairman Martin replied that the procedure beginning with thismeeting, as agreed to by the Committee at the December 19 meeting,contemplated voting on the current economic policy directive when theCommittee reconvened following a luncheon recess.The Chairman then called for a continuation of the usual go-around of views on the economic situation and monetary policy beginningwith Mr. Ellis.Mr. Ellis said that the terminology used by Mr. Noyes indescribing the over-all economic situation at the end of 1961 couldwell be applied to the situation in New England. The record of department 1/9/62 -23-store sales was excellent, not only for the Boston area but New Englandas a whole. Sales for the year, on a cumulative basis, were about 5per cent over 1960, one of the best records of any District. Automobilesales continued brisk in December, and this briskness carried over intothe manufacturing field. Manufacturers were experiencing order increasesand were responding by slow expansion in their production, after seasonaladjustment. There was evidence of the increased activity in electricpower consumption and the number of man-hours worked in manufacturing.However, even though 1960 was a year of relatively low manufacturingemployment, there was still only a gain of 0.3 per cent in 1961. Statis-tics on other employment were stronger, but on a year-to-year basis theincrease in total employment was only about 1 per cent. On the otherhand, insured unemployment was some 25 per cent below year-ago levels.Continuing, Mr. Ellis said that during the past few monthsconstruction activity in New England had been rising more rapidly thanin the nation as a whole. On a cumulative basis, it had recovered tosuch an extent as to match the national pattern. Banking statisticsreflected the steady expansion in economic activity. Debits and demanddeposits were up materially, and in December check volume at the FederalReserve Bank was 12 per cent ahead of 1960 on a year-to-year basis. Veryfew banks had as yet announced increases in interest rates on time andsavings deposits. Business loans rose further in December, and loan-depositratios matched year-ago levels. The banks continued to shorten their 1/9/62 -24-portfolios of Government securities. Except for one two-week interval,District banks had been heavy sellers of Federal funds since lateSeptember.Turning to the national economy and monetary policy, Mr. Ellissaid he was attracted to an analysis that started with recognition thatthroughout 1961 the Federal Reserve System had supplied about as manyreserves as the banking system could absorb without pushing short-termrates down to such a degree as to stimulate short-term capital movements.He agreed that there should be some further bank credit and monetaryexpansion. However, if the System continued to supply reserves to thesame extent as in the past, speculative tendencies and credit excessescould be expected to develop. Therefore, the System should provideonly for some steady reserve growth. Then, if market demands shouldbecome more intense, the banks would borrow and the market would tightenitself. Only after such tightening should there be a confirming discountrate action on the part of the Federal Reserve System. At the December19 meeting the Committee had adopted a policy of providing additionalreserves at a somewhat slower rate, with a shading of policy toward some-what less ease. Since the Treasury would be conducting financing operationsin the next few weeks, it would seem appropriate to make no change atthis time in the basic policy adopted at the December 19 meeting.Mr. Ellis also said that in view of the traditional year-enddifficulties, he had been quite satisfied with conditions in the money 1/9/62 -25-market and with the actions of the Account Management during recentweeks. He would expect the Desk to vary from strict adherence to thelanguage of any directive if market conditions developed that wereat variance with expectations at the time the directive was issued.For the period ahead, he would favor a current economic policy directivemuch along the lines of the existing directive.Mr. Ellis said he had viewed the new format of the directiveas an opportunity to experiment with the use of factors that theCommittee might consider most important at any particular time. Onoccasion he believed the directive should refer to total reserves, andon occasion to other factors. Given the present situation, he wouldexpect that the policy would be to refer to some expansion of the volumeof reserves. He would anticipate net free reserves in the $400 millionarea and expect a rate on short-term bills of around 2-3/4 per cent,with Federal funds occasionally at 3 per cent but mostly just below.As to the continuing directive, Mr. Ellis said he would liketo see the Committee arrive at an understanding whereby that directivewould be renewed each time without having an official motion made andacted upon at each meeting. As to the current directive, he would dropout the sentence: "No overt action shall be taken to reduce unduly thesupply of reserves or to bring about a rise in interest rates." In sayingthis, he did not mean to suggest that the Desk should proceed to takeovert action. However, while this sentence may have seemed appropriate 1/9/62 -26-the first time the Committee adopted its current procedure, he questionedwhether it was wise for the Committee constantly to refer to what itproposed not to do. As to operations in the longer-term area of themarket, he hoped that implementation of the current directive would notlead to the purchasing of longer-term securities in such degree as tosuggest that the Federal Reserve was dominating the market. On the otherhand, he would favor maintaining contact with the market over the entirerange of maturities.Mr. Irons said that during the closing weeks of 1961, expansionmoved ahead rather substantially in the Eleventh District. The year hadended on a strong note. Department store sales in December were upsubstantially from the preceding month. The industrial production indexrose to a new record high, with advances spread rather widely throughoutthe manufacturing and mining areas. There had been a seasonal advancein crude oil production, and refinery activity also improved. Constructionactivity moved ahead sharply; it looked as though 1961 would be up about7 per cent from the preceding year. There had been little change inemployment figures, except for the seasonal movement, while unemploymentin the area was about 4.9 per cent of the labor force. Agriculturalactivity was very good, with about a 7 per cent improvement in cash farmincome indicated for the year 1961 as a whole.Turning to banking, Mr. Irons said there was strength at year-end,with loans up sharply. For the year, loans and investments each were up 1/9/62 -27-about 10 per cent. At the end of the year, demand deposits also showed astrong advance, especially deposits of individuals, partnerships, andcorporations. The banks appeared to be in a reasonably liquid position.Except for some temporary borrowing incident to year-end adjustments,borrowing from the Federal Reserve Bank had been quite nominal. Therehad been a spreading tendency throughout the District to raise interestrates on time and savings deposits, with considerable advertising, butpersonal comments by bankers indicated that the increases were made withreluctance.Turning to policy, Mr. Irons commented that the dominant factorin the period ahead would be the Treasury's intervention in the market,which suggested maintaining the status quo as nearly as possible duringthe next two-week period. By this he meant that policy should continueto be implemented in about the same manner as during the past threeweeks. Considering all of the year-end disturbances, he felt thatthe New York Bank had done a good job in operating in a way that carriedout the consensus. Further, it had seemed to him that the draft ofdirective, as distributed, was a good statement of the consensus. Thedirective could have been written in various ways, but he was agreeableto it as written. For the next two weeks, he would envisage a bill ratearound 2-3/4 per cent and a Federal funds rate between 2-3/4 and 3 percent, with reasonable fluctuations. While he would provide some reservesif such were needed, he would not object if the market firmed against 1/9/62 -28-itself somewhat; however, there should be no direct action on thepart of the Desk to bring about such a firming development.The domination of the Treasury in the picture may have causedsome disturbance in the market, Mr. Irons noted. In his view the Deskshould work largely according to the feel of the market, at the sametime watching interest rate movements and reserve availability. Twoweeks from now the Committee would have an opportunity to look at whathad happened and see what action it might want to take. Perhaps thataction would be a little more affirmative than seemed warranted today.Developments were moving in the direction where, from the standpoint ofboth domestic and international factors, monetary policy action mightbe more clearly indicated. The strengthening of the economy might causedomestic considerations to fit into the same kind of policy that theCommittee would want to follow from the point of view of internationalconsiderations.Mr. Swan reported that the business situation in the TwelfthDistrict continued to improve. While employment data for Decemberwere not yet available, construction and manufacturing led a generaladvance in November and reports of employer hiring intentions for thenext few months suggested a further improvement in most of the majorlabor markets in the District. Steel production rose in December, anddemand strengthened for copper and zinc. As elsewhere, department storesales were strong in December and new car sales, on the basis of early 1/9/62 -29-registrations in California, were quite good. In the three weeks endedDecember 27, weekly reporting banks showed substantial increases inbusiness, real estate, and consumer loans. They also increased theirholdings of Government and other securities. Virtually every major bankin the District had gone to a 3-1/2 per cent interest rate on savingsaccounts and many of them had also announced a 4 per cent rate on one-yearcertificates or some kind of special savings accounts. The 4 per centrate loomed very large in the advertisements and the 3-1/2 per cent ratevery small, but this did not reflect exactly the situation that the bankswould like to see develop. One bank had made an estimate that the 4 percent money represented by special certificates was coming from the bank'sown savings depositors, as against funds from other sources, in a ratioof about 3 to 1. In view of the substantial volume of savings depositsheld by District banks, many banks were concerned at the moment aboutearnings and were looking around for higher yields, including the possi-bility of shifting into municipals from U. S. Government securities.In terms of policy, Mr. Swan pointed out that it had alreadybeen noted several times at this meeting that Treasury financingoperations rather obviously dictated an even keel, that is, no changein policy for the immediate future. He would include in that pictureno change in the discount rate. As also had been mentioned, the pastthree weeks provided an illustration of market forces tightening thesituation. It did not seem to him that in the weeks immediately ahead 1/9/62 -30-the Committee would want to do anything to promote this tightening.However, it probably would continue to some extent due to market forces,which posed some problem relative to maintaining an even keel.The behavior of the bill rate in the past three weeks had beenin line with what the Committee had indicated in its directive, Mr. Swanpointed out. While he was not sure that this result could be achieved,he would hope that some margin could be maintained between the billrate and 3 per cent. He would favor a bill rate around 2.75 or 2.8 percent, yet it seemed to him that if the rise should continue and the rateshould approach 3 per cent, that would tend to add, in a self-reinforcingsense, to the upward pressure on rates. If it should begin to createexpectations that a discount rate increase might be imminent, that wouldtend to reinforce upward pressures in the market, and there were enoughsuch pressures from other market expectations at the moment. Since itdid seem that some selling might be ahead in terms of seasonal factors,this might imply a possibility of absorbing reserves by selling somesecurities other than bills, unless that would in turn conflict withTreasury financing plans, depending on the securities offered by theTreasury in its cash financing. Some problem might develop in thatarea, but of course this could not be known at the moment.Regarding the inclusion of the total reserve concept in thedirective, Mr. Swan said that although he was one of those who hadpreferred the other phrasing of the draft directive, he thought the 1/9/62 -31-directive did reflect the attitude at the December 19 meeting. On thebroader question of the general use of a reference to total reservesin the directive, he had some sympathy with Mr. Treiber's remarks. Itseemed to him that total reserves were valuable as a general indicatorof where the Committee had been and where in the longer run it mightwant to go. On the other hand, he had some question about the use oftotal reserves as a short-run guide. He appreciated the fact that thequestion of the availability of reserves was important, that a reductionin net free reserves because required reserves had increased was differentfrom a reduction because total reserves went down. However, he stillhad a question about the source of the additional available reserves.This might be a problem, partly, of what was meant by providing reserves.In the week ended January 3, there was an average daily excess of $481million of reserves over the total reserve target. He would agree thatthe Desk could not appropriately have offset this, yet as Mr. Thomasindicated, this excess had resulted from member bank borrowing ratherthan positive action on the part of the Desk. Nevertheless, thisillustrated the fact that the increase of over $300 million in totalreserves, as supplied by borrowing, was quite different from an increaseas supplied by Federal Reserve initiative through open market operations.At the December 19 meeting, Mr. Thomas had suggested in his statementthat the specific guide to operations should be total reserves--or non-borrowed reserves--rather than free reserves or interest rates. But the 1/9/62 -32-phrase inside the dashes did not receive any further attention. There-fore, he wondered whether, for shorter or longer-run reserve guidance,the Committee should not look more specifically at nonborrowed reserves.By subtraction, one could get that out of the staff memorandum, but hewould like to have the figure actually shown. This had not made muchdifference when there was little or no borrowing, but when borrowing rosesubstantially the Committee might want to consider nonborrowed reservesas well as total or free reserves.Mr. Swan also said that he was not sure that the Committee shoulddiscard free reserves as a guide even if it wanted to deemphasize thatstatistic. Whether rightly or not, the market attached considerableweight to free reserves. From that standpoint, it seemed quite fortunatethat the average of free reserves ($341 million) for the week endedDecember 27 was the revised figure, issued a week later, rather than theestimate. For the next two weeks, and thinking in terms of an evenkeel, he felt that the Committee might have in mind free reserves of$400-$450 million rather than $400 million and below.As to the directive, Mr. Swan said he would agree with Mr. Ellisthat the last sentence in the directive issued after the December 19meeting was not only unnecessary but could be harmful. It stated whatshould not be done rather than what should be done.In a final comment, Mr. Swan referred to the provision in theprocedure for reallocation of securities in the System Open Market Account 1/9/62 -33-whereby when a Reserve Bank's reserve ratio falls below 30 per cent onthe next to the last business day of a statement week or month, an adjust-ment is made in Account participations to bring that Bank' s ratio back to35 per cent. However, the result of the procedure was to bring the Bank' sratio to above the System reserve ratio at the present time. If the Com-mittee so desired, the procedure could, of course, be changed at theMarch organization meeting. He simply mentioned the matter for what itwas worth.Mr. Deming commented that the procedure of reporting at Committeemeetings every two or three weeks perhaps tended to cause some loss ofperspective. Looking at personal income, the Ninth District did notgain as rapidly as the nation in the last half of 1961. However, it hadbeen gaining more rapidly through the middle of 1961. When one lookedat the last half of the year relative to the beginning of 1960, the Dis-trict had shown a better gain than the nation. Perhaps, therefore, thesituation in the District was not as bad, in a relative sense, as hemight have seemed to imply from time to time.Department store sales in November and December set a new recordfor the Ninth District, Mr. Deming said, and last year the District didsomewhat better than the country as a whole in comparison with 1959. Itwas probably fair to say that the District was still suffering somewhat,relatively speaking, from the effects of the drought last summer, but itwas moving back in line with the rest of the country. Even in the banking 1/9/62 -34-area, where loan demand in the District had lagged the nation, thedemand in November was up. This trend seemed to have continued inDecember, with the demand again focusing on the city rather than thecountry banks.With reference to the results of the recent "Minnesota Poll" onpersonal finances and general business conditions in 1962, which werepublished in the Minneapolis Tribune last Sunday, Mr. Deming noted thatmore than 4 out of every 10 State residents (42 per cent) expected busi-ness conditions in the United States to be better in 1962. This comparedwith 29 per cent in December 1960 and 36 per cent in December 1959. Oneout of three respondents thought he was going to be better off financiallya year from now, as compared with one out of five in December 1960 andone out of four in December 1959.Turning to the national economy and monetary policy, Mr. Demingsaid he was one of those who had believed that total reserves would be agood guide for the Desk. He had so stated at the December 19 meeting,at which time he also stated that he thought the movement should be to-ward less ease. He had some sympathy with what Messrs. Treiber and Rousehad said about total reserves as a guide to the Desk, but he also hadsome sympathy with what Mr. Thomas had said, namely, that the same crit-icism would apply to free reserves. Probably, it would likewise applyto nonborrowed reserves, although he had not looked closely. Reviewingthe past three weeks, there was no question but that there had been less 1/9/62 -35-ease in the market, which was what the Committee said should happen.The bill rate was in the upper part of the 2-1/2 -2-3/4 per cent range,as also specifically mentioned by the Committee. With all the year-endchurning and other developments, he felt that the Desk had done a goodjob. It did not hew to the 4 per cent total reserve growth rate target,and would have fared badly had it done so. However, this did not meannecessarily that total reserves would not be a reasonably good guide inthe future. The past period was probably as bad from that standpoint ascould have been encountered, ad total reserves could be a better opera-tional guide at some time in the future.With regard to the forthcoming two weeks, and probably the periodbeyond that, Mr. Deming felt that the directive ought to be written interms of maintaining an even keel. If there was less ease at the moment,that condition probably should be maintained for the next five weeks.In other words, the present policy should be continued. He would thinkthat the Committee would not want to recover the reserve surplus--ifthat was what one wanted to call it--that had accumulated in the pastthree weeks, at least not to such an extent as to change the feeling inthe market. He would emphasize maintaining the bill rate at around 2-3/4per cent during the next two weeks. There seemed to be no reason for,and positive reasons against, changing the discount rate at this time.He would renew the continuing directive.Mr. Baughman said it appeared that business conditions in theSeventh District had continued to improve somewhat, with the steel and 1/9/62 -36-automobile industries continuing to be the outstanding factors in thepicture. The steel industry saw nothing immediately ahead except a con-tinued rise in activity, due in part to the uncertainty regardingcontinuation of production but also due in part to a rebuilding of in-ventories from what the industry believed was a very low level, so faras most users were concerned, at the end of 1961. Contacts in the auto-bile industry continued to hold a very optimistic view, notwithstandingthe decline in the daily average sales rate in December and notwithstand-ing a gradual cutback by one producer and a continued strike at anotherproducer. There was evidence of some further pickup in employment,mostly in areas primarily concerned with motor vehicles and electricalgoods, which were benefiting from an increased flow of defense orders.Recently there had been same recruitment of skilled machine-shop workersin the District by West Coast aircraft firms. Retail sales of generalmerchandise in December appeared to have moved somewhat closer to thenational pattern after a considerable period during which they lagged.The loan picture at District weekly reporting banks had beenfollowing about the same trend as in the nation recently, Mr. Baughmansaid, although there was a little less pickup in security holdings thanfor weekly reporting banks generally. Even aside from the fact thatthere was no tax bill maturing in December, and some similar factors,evidence was seen of a pickup in basic loan demand at District bankscurrently. However, no pickup had been seen in consumer loans, and real 1/9/62 -37-estate lending remained slow. Chicago banks were holding rather largeportfolios of bills. Unless there was some change between now and theApril 1 personal property tax assessment date, they would seem to be ina better position than usual to meet the demands with which they arealways confronted at that time.Early reports from the Reserve Bank's monthly survey of ratespaid on time deposits indicated that about 12 per cent of the Districtbanks in metropolitan areas had announced rates of 3-1/2 per cent ormore. Most of them had announced a rate of 4 per cent on time certifi-cates of one-year maturity, but there was some variation in respect topaying 4 per cent on savings deposits over one year. A small number ofreports available from banks in rural areas gave some evidence of atendency to stick to 3 per cent on savings accounts while offering 4 percent on 12-month certificates of deposit. As compared with the experiencewhen the maximum permissible rates were last raised, effective January 1,1957, banks were moving much more rapidly to the new maximum rates. InJanuary 1957, only about 5 per cent of the banks in metropolitan areashad moved to the 3 per cent ceiling. However, a much larger proportionwere at the ceiling rate this time before the ceiling was raised. Thelarge Chicago banks had announced their changes in rates only last week-end, so they had had little experience with the new rates as of yesterdayafternoon. However, they indicated that they were getting a large re-sponse, with some evidence that the money was coming in part from thetransfer of funds from other kinds of financial institutions. 1/9/62 -38-Mr. Baughman said, in summary, that evidence was seen of increasedactivity in the Seventh District. However, there was still a very sub-stantial amount of unused capacity in most industries.Mr. Clay said that for the period immediately ahead it appearedthat Treasury financing was the dominant consideration in the formulationof monetary policy--calling for the maintenance of the so-called "even keel."Continuation of essentially the current posture without further tighteningwould be appropriate for other considerations as well. The Treasury billrate had reached the level of approximately 2-3/4 per cent that the Com-mittee set as its goal at the last meeting in view of the internationalbalance-of-payments problem, and the maintenance of approximately thatrate level would seem to be in order. In terms of the domestic economy,the objective of monetary policy should continue to be that of encour-aging economic expansion and the fuller utilization of manpower and otherresources. Recent economic developments had been distinctly favorable,but there was still a long distance to go in order to attain the satis-factory level of activity that was essential in the interest of both ourdomestic and our international problems.Mr. Clay observed that the nature of open market operations wouldbe strongly conditioned by seasonal factors in the weeks imediately ahead.It might not be necessary to operate in longer-term maturities, but theManager should have the authority to do so if it became necessary to off-set some of the sales of Treasury bills. The Reserve Banks' discountrate should not be changed. 1/9/62 -39-Mr. Wayne reported that Fifth District business continued to moveahead at a good rate toward the end of 1961. Strength was evident par-ticularly in sustained record levels of employment and increased consumerbuying. Christmas business apparently rose to record volume and was ex-pected to provide additional impetus in some industrial lines. Textileand apparel manufacturers, for instance, viewed the resulting reductionof soft goods inventories as a prelude to a good volume of orders forspring and summer. The construction industry, one of 1961's most consistentsources of strength, gained new support from a strong November increase incontract awards. Furthermore, the November rise included the secondlargest seasonally adjusted volume of residential awards in the past fiveyears, an encouraging sign for the lumber business, which had thus farfailed to respond to the business upswing. Fourth quarter coal productionwas up considerably from the previous year's level, and producers continuedto take a bright view of the future. The tobacco business had a recordyear all along the line, and the experts foresaw further gains in consump-tion in 1962.Mr. Wayne said that after nearly a year of experimentation it hadbecome the regular practice of the Richmond Bank to contact a representa-tive group of 65 businessmen every three weeks. Forty-five manufacturerswere among those responding to the most recent request. On balance,theyreported a rising trend in new orders, shipments, and employment, but theproportion of favorable reports was somewhat smaller than previously. 1/9/62 -40-Hours of work, formerly rising, were reportedly fairly stable. Respond-ents' views of the outlook for profits were somewhat less salutary thanthey were a few weeks earlier.The recent strength in bank loan demand across the nation waseven more pronounced in the Fifth District, Mr. Wayne said. Businessand all other loans had been particularly strong.Mr. Wayne expressed the view that the results of policy sincethe December 19 meeting had been desirable. He would like to see billrates edge somewhat further upward, but he would not favor any overtactions to nudge the market--particularly in view of the forthcomingTreasury financing. He believed that every encouragement should be givento any natural tightening forces. Over the past five weeks there hadbeen a definite and fairly strong upward movement in primary spot marketprices. It was too early to know whether this would be reflected in thebroader price indexes, but in any event it should be remembered thatprice increases by this phase of earlier recoveries were quite small incomparison to those that occurred later in the upswing. In short, therecent stability of prices might present a somewhat misleading pictureof the pressures that would be felt as business activity expanded.Moreover, as Mr. Noyes had pointed out, the strength of the expansionmovement was such that it no longer seemed to need further stimulus.Mr. Wayne said he wished to emphasize again that he did not havein mind sufficient tightening to interfere with the Treasury financing. 1/9/62However, he would encourage any factors moving the System on the way itmight have to travel in the months ahead. He would leave the discountrate at 3 per cent at this time. The policy direction or trend contem-plated in the current directive should be continued (though he agreedwith Messrs. Ellis and Swan that the admonition against overt actionshould not be allowed to remain in the directive indefinitely). Thecontinuing directive should be renewed.Mr. Mills said he shared completely Mr. Treiber's reservationsabout attempting to use total reserves as an infallible guide to the formu-lation of monetary and credit policy. His own belief was that there wereother satisfactory guides that could be used in combination and had dollarvalues, including particularly net free reserves. He did not believethat the Committee could legally, or should, abdicate its responsibilityby leaving the Desk to be guided completely by its feel and judgment ofthe market.As to current and prospective developments having a bearing onpolicy, Mr. Mills presented the following statement:Since the December 19th meeting of the Open Market Committee,natural factors working through market processes have producedthe kind of monetary and credit policy climate that preferablyshould have been developed over many weeks past by consciousFederal Reserve System actions. An abrupt rise in required re-serves, actuated by higher demands for bank loans, has beenreflected in a tighter money market and a firmer interest ratestructure, but has in no wise constricted the basic availabilityof bank credit.The present situation should now be capitalized upon policy.wise and not thwarted or negated by an impulsive effort to loosen 1/9/62the money market and bring down interest rates; in fact, to at-tempt to do so would only confuse market operators, who long agojustified in their own reasoning the kind of money market con-ditions that have eventuated. (To interpolate, there is now aprojected level of free reserves in the area of $550 millionfor the current statement week, and as of yesterday the rate forFederal funds dropped below 2 per cent. I would feel that thisis a negation of the policy that should appropriately be carriedout.) As far as the Treasury's prospective financing program isconcerned, the adequate credit base presently serving the privateborrowing needs of the economy is also broad enough to supportthe Treasury's approaching cash financing, given a temporary re-serve assist if a tax and loan account financing procedure isfollowed at that time.A monetary and credit policy appropriate to existing finan-cial and economic circumstances would (in the family sense of theword) "adopt" the kind of policy that has recently developed outof the interplay of natural market factors. The results of sucha policy would be to tacitly recognize the appearance of firmerinterest rates and their restraining influence both on an over-growth of credit and on the outflow of gold and dollars from theUnited States. A wholesome public reaction could be expected tothis Federal Reserve System policy stance which would at long lastface up to the national and international financial exigencies thatdominate the attitudes of many economic observers.Inasmuch as any early demand for commercial bank loans canbe satisfied readily through a rearrangement of bank assets(replacing securities with loans), excessive upward pressure oninterest rates arising from this source, and money market dis-turbances, are unlikely. The economic policy directive issuedat the last meeting of the Committee conceives a more liberalmonetary and credit policy than is called for. It should,therefore, be modified.Mr. Robertson said he saw nothing in the economic picture todaythat would justify any deviation from the long-continued policy of evenkeel during periods of Treasury financing, He would hope, however, thatthe even keel would be related to the past five-week period rather thanthe most recent week. 1/9/62 -43-Mr. Shepardson said it seemed to him that the situation portrayedin the current reports, namely, rising activity in the domestic economyand an adverse international payments position, justified a lessened rateof monetary expansion. He was not disposed to argue how this should bemeasured, but in his opinion the situation had reached the point where therate of monetary expansion that had prevailed for some time past couldbe lessened, recognizing of course the necessity of taking into accountthe Treasury operations over the next few weeks. While these operationsshould not be upset, he continued to hope that by whatever guideline wasappropriate, whether it be free reserves or total reserves or some otherguide, the System could slow down a little the rate of expansion of re-serves and the money supply. A Treasury bill rate of 2-3/4 per cent orupward seemed to him appropriate. Likewise, he thought it would be ap-propriate if free reserves were in the area of $400-$450 million ratherthan $500-$550 million. It would not seem appropriate to consider a dis-count rate change at the moment, although that might be in the offing.Mr. King said that although business activity clearly was improvingthroughout the country, he thought it was improving rather slowly. TheCommittee should be careful not to think that Christmas was necessarilygoing to last all year. The holiday season buying had, of course, removedstock from some shelves and the replacement of that stock would carryinto the new year. Treasury operations were now imminent, and it was dif-ficult to oppose an even keel policy. However, as a reference point for 1/9/62maintaining an even keel, he would take the period beginning January 4,as reviewed in the supplemental memorandum on open market operations re-ceived from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. An extension of thoseconditions would, he thought, be appropriate for this particular monthand for this particular type of business cycle, the characteristics ofwhich seemed to differ somewhat from other recent cycles. He would notcare to see open market operations conducted in such manner that thecurrent level of free reserves would be reduced too much; the desirabilityof free reserves as low as $400 million seemed to him doubtful.Mr. Mitchell commented that one could be thankful that economicactivity was continuing to expand at a rather steady pace. He did notthink there was anyone present who doubted that there was still considerableroom for a good deal of additional noninflationary growth. It should bea major objective of Government economic policy, he suggested, to see thatthis condition continued as long as possible. However, the problem ofmonetary policy was one of dealing with expectations in the financialarea. Anticipations, and speculation based thereon, were the things aboutwhich it was necessary to be apprehensive. There was currently a greatdeal of speculation about a change in Federal Reserve policy, and this hadgiven rise to a considerable amount of uncertainty in financial markets.In his opinion, therefore, this was no time to drop from the currenteconomic policy directive the statement that no overt action signallinga shift in policy was to be taken. An even keel should be maintainedduring the next two weeks, first, on account of the Treasury situation, 1/9/62and second, because even apart from that circumstance this would be, atleast in his opinion, the right policy.Mr. Mitchell went on to say that there were same things that ap-peared likely to cause trouble in the future, and the Committee shouldstart thinking about them. For a long time there had been a highly arti-ficial level of short-term rates, which served as a deterrent to thestretching out of investment portfolios of many institutions, includingbanks. If they should decide to stretch out their portfolios, that wouldhave an influence on longer-term rates, which had been quite tranquil,even declining a little. One might look forward to a situation wherethere would be this kind of action, which would be desirable as far asthe economy was concerned, and he hoped that the System would not con-tribute to another abortion of economic activity such as occurred in 1959by tightening too soon. The current volume of steel orders seemed toreflect largely the objective of temporary inventory accumlation; there-fore, the situation was more analogous to a seasonal development than acyclical swing. For this reason, be would try to evaluate the quantityof credit necessary to finance those orders and accommodate it like aseasonal development instead of attempting to use this temporary phenomenonas a reason for a more restrictive monetary policy. So far as financingsteel users' inventory accumulation was concerned, it should not be a signalto set off a sequence of monetary restraint as in 1959.Further, year-end credit statistics should be appraised withcaution. It would seem advisable to wait and see the figures for the next 1/9/62 -46-couple of weeks, for they might be toned down quite a bit after a shortflare-up around the end of the year.With regard to instructions to the Desk, Mr. Mitchell commented thatthey should be consistent and capable of being executed. If the directiveshould become inconsistent, as he understood it was in the past period,the Committee should be gotten together by telephone and asked what itwanted the Account Management to do. The Committee should be able to com-municate to the Manager in terms that the latter could understand and thathe considered consistent. If the Manager failed to understand or feltthat the instructions were not consistent, it was up to the Comittee tomake the instructions consistent and understandable. The fact that a dif-ficult problem was involved should not prevent the Committee from attempt-ing to communicate understandably with the Manager, and the Manager shouldcome back to the Committee when he did not get meaningful instructions.Mr. Fulton reported that a year end economic activity in theFourth District was moving up briskly. For the year as a whole, depart-ment store sales were up 3 per cent from 1960, reflecting strength inDecember. Automobile sales receded slightly in December, as they didnationally. The seasonal rise in unemployment was partly offset by im-proved job opportunities. However, in the recession the District droppedfurther in manufacturing employment than the country as a whole, and ithad not yet recovered to the same extent as the nation.Turning to the steel industry, Mr. Fulton said that a flood oforders had been coming in for certain types of steel. Order books were 1/9/62 -47-full for the first quarter, with some items being placed on allocation.Shipments were picking up and were due to increase until mid-year. Theautomotive and appliance industries were taking large tonnage for currentproduction and for stockpiling, with the auto companies insisting thattheir suppliers accumulate a 90-day inventory in addition to regular pro-duction needs. In summary, the outlook was for a booming first half inthe steel industry but for a poor third quarter, with no hope seen ofavoiding a let-down after mid-year. Operations were now at between 80and 90 per cent of capacity, but profits were down from prior years, onthe basis of comparable tonnage, despite the fact that the steel companieshad spent, and were spending, large sums for modernization of equipmentand to increase capacity.The labor situation in the steel industry, with its pervasive ef-fects on other industries, was a matter of concern, Mr. Fulton said. Thekind of package settlement that was worked out in the automobile industrywould be substantially more expensive for the steel companies than for theauto companies, and evidently would necessitate a price increase. In fact,although there was concern about a price increase in light of foreign com-petition, it seemed almost inevitable that any substantial labor settle-ment would result in a price adjustment. At present, there was every ap-pearance that a strike would occur; its likely duration was more uncertain.Turning to other industries, Mr. Fulton said he understood thatbusinessmen were appraising the current improvement in activity withcaution. They were trying to put their houses in order and to build up 1/9/62 -48adequate but not excessive inventories. While there had been an abruptincrease in bank loans in the District over the year end, some bankersfelt that the increase was temporary, that most of it was in loans onsecurities and loans to finance companies, and it did not reflect in-ventory borrowing. Their projection was for a rather steady volume ofcommercial loans, with no real increase for at least the next 90 days.Turning to policy, Mr. Fulton said he would hope that the billrate could be maintained at about the 2-3/4 per cent level, with freereserves in the $400-$500 million area if that would contribute to a billrate around the level mentioned. For the period ahead he would maintainan even keel, with no overt action. He would not change the discountrate at this time.Mr. Bopp commented substantially as follows:There is nothing especially noteworthy to report about theThird District. We, too, have had very brisk department storesales. Except for a recent more-than-seasonal rise in claimsin December, the unemployment picture is looking better. Inbanking, although reserve positions still are essentially easy,there has been a perceptible trend toward less ease. Reservecity banks have been borrowing more frequently, although onlysmall amounts, at the discount window, and they have been morefrequent borrowers of Federal funds. We feel that the recentsomewhat firmer "tone" of the money market is appropriate andwith Treasury operations pending should be continued.I am concerned with the public relations aspect of ourcurrent economic policy directive. An important reason forchanging our method was to promote public understanding andto facilitate analysis by professional observers. The direc-tive of December 19, 1961 instructed the Manager of the Accountto conduct operations so as to produce "a somewhat slowerrate of increase in total reserves than during recent months."Actually, as has been pointed out, total reserves have in-creased much more rapidly. An historian, looking back on this 1/9/62period, might be tempted to conclude that the Manager had notfollowed his instructions. This is the kind of evidence inwhich some historians and analysts delight.In striking contrast to such an interpretation is thefact that everyone who has commented on operations since ourlast meeting has agreed that the Manager did an excellent job.He was guided by the last two sentences of the directive:"Operations shall place emphasis on continuance ofthe three-month Treasury bill rate at close to thetop of the range recently prevailing. No overtaction shall be taken to reduce unduly the supplyof reserves or to bring about a rise in interestrates."This experience casts additional light on the nature ofour problem. I have been impressed with the view developedover a long period by Mr. Bryan and Mr. Johns that the direc-tive to the Manager should be as precise as possible and shouldbe related to the means at his disposal.Experience in the last three weeks demonstrates that theManager cannot control the volume of reserves--total, nonborrowedor free; and that they are inadequate guides to policy even ifthey were subject to precise control by the Manager.The Manager operates from moment to moment. His onlycontrol in the short run is over the size and composition ofthe portfolio of securities. The portfolio, of course, is relatedto reserves but not in any invariable or even predictable way.It is beyond the capacity of the Manager to achieve a preciseobjective couched in terms of reserves.A directive in terms of yields on Government securitiescould, of course, be achieved so long as the portfolio of Govern-ment securities was appropriate on the one hand and there wereexcess gold reserves on the other. The Radcliffe Commission,if I understand its report, would favor a directive couched interms of interest rates. My own view is that this is inadequate.Neither of the two precise criteria that the Manager can in factachieve--size and ccmposition of the portfolio and yields onGovernment securities--is adequate for our purpose in our presentstate of knowledge and foresight.This leaves us with the alternatives of expressing thedirective in some general term such as "tone" or "feel" of themarket or in terms of several criteria which would define thesewords--such as the Federal funds rate, bill rates, volume ofvarious reserve magnitudes, and so on. The discussion wouldindicate to the Manager the relative importance that he shouldattach to the several items.-49- 1/9/62 -50-I wish we could be more precise; but I would not purchaseprecision at the cost of occasionally forcing the Manager to dowhat is clearly not intended.Mr. Bryan said there were no important developments in the SixthDistrict that differed significantly from national trends. The Districthad ended the year briskly. However, he was concerned about some longer-run factors in the District. With a heavy percentage of completely unskilledand semi-skilled labor, he was apprehensive that in an age of automationthe Sixth District was not prepared to expand as it had in the past decade,and at a rate that was needed.Mr. Bryan commented that there had been a number of statementsmade during this meeting with which he would take issue, but that he wouldnot go into them at this particular time. As he saw it, every signal wasflying to indicate that the Committee should move gradually toward a morerestrictive policy. Abstracting the next two weeks, he would suggest,therefore, that the Desk proceed according to its feel of the market and,based on that feel, trend toward a situation of less ease. In view ofthe impending Treasury operations, he would suggest that for the next twoweeks the Desk strive to maintain an even keel.Mr. Francis said that in the Eighth District production quickenedand unemployment declined somewhat in November. Also, bank credit, bothloans and investments, expanded in December. But, relying on the evidenceof bank debits, over-all activity improved only moderately during Novemberand, in fact, was still slightly below the May to July average. The 1/9/62 -51-District had not moved up appreciably from the plateau of activity thatappeared about mid-year in both the District and the nation. Longer-termmeasures suggested that the District was not growing in pace with thenation in several significant economic activities. To a large extentthis failure to keep in step with the nation reflected developments inthe St. Louis metropolitan area. Employment in St. Louis had laggednational growth, even though the unemployment ratio had been cut to abouthalf what it was earlier in 1961. Bank deposit growth at District memberbanks in the year to November 1961 did not match the percentage increasefor all member banks because time deposit growth was relatively less inthe District. Construction contract awards for the first eleven monthsof 1961 were about 6 per cent below year-earlier levels, in contrast to aplus 2 per cent nationally. Retail sales in the District, according toCensus data on Group I stores, were below year-ago volumes in October,whereas nationally the totals were slightly above the previous year.Mr. Balderston commented that although the money supply properincreased only about 3 per cent during the past calendar year, the moneysupply plus time deposits increased about 6 per cent as did the reservessupporting private deposit expansion. He mentioned that as backgroundfor what he was going to say next. This was that since the September-October period the reserves supporting private deposit expansion hadincreased at an annual rate about double the 6 per cent rate of reserveexpansion since March 1, 1961. Therefore, he would favor, as a longer-run policy, the continuation of some additions to bank reserves, but at 1/9/62 -52-a rate less than the rate that had prevailed recently. To repeat a phrasethat he had used at the December 19 meeting, he would favor a decelerationof the rate of acceleration. However, even though in his opinion thatshould be the longer-run goal, he would favor approaching that goalgradually. It seemed to him the financial community understood theSystem's actions best when the System moved from one position to another,or changed from one direction to another, with smoothness and gradualnessrather than in a jerky fashion. For the period immediately ahead, ofcourse, precedence must be given to the needs of the Treasury, whichwould be in the market between now and the middle of February. It wasespecially important that the large refunding that would take place aroundthe first of February should be a success because $6.2 billion of thematuring securities were held by the public. Consequently, during theperiod between now and the middle of February he would favor the maintenanceof an even keel. After the middle of February, there would be an opportunityfor a change of System policy if conditions at that time made such a changeseem necessary.Chairman Martin commented that the only thing with which theCommittee was immediately concerned today was the forthcoming two-weekperiod. Like Mr. Robertson, he did not see anything in the present picturethat would cause the Committee to deviate from the long-held policy of evenkeel in a period of Treasury financing, and such a period was immediatelyahead.Nevertheless, the Account Manager might have a difficult time intrying to maintain an even keel. He (Chairman Martin) had come to have more 1/9/62 -53-and more sympathy for the position of the Account Manager the longer heworked in this field.After commenting that he thought Mr. Bopp had made some good pointswith regard to the formulation of the current policy directive, the Chairmanwent on to say that he thought it would be unfortunate, on the eve ofTreasury financing, if the language of the present directive with regardto avoiding overt action were to be changed. This illustrated the kindof problem with which the Committee was confronted all the time. Therewas a major public relations problem involved in explaining System actionsto the public.The Chairman then noted that there had been dissents at theDecember 19 meeting from the implementation of policy according to theconsensus, as then stated. Those who had dissented might still feel thatthe policy expressed in the consensus was not correct. However, theyprobably would not want to dissent from the maintenance of an even keelduring the period of Treasury financing.Mr. Mills said he understood that the even keel policy would bekeyed into the sort of reserve and interest rate climate that had pre-vailed in the period since the meeting of the Committee on December 19,following which Chairman Martin noted that on December 19 there had beena split decision, by vote of eight to four, on the implementation of policyaccording to the consensus. It would be his understanding that the evenkeel now being talked about would be an extension of the policy reflectedin the majority position then expressed. 1/9/62 -54-Mr. Mills then said that he would have interpreted the weight ofopinion today as accepting the sort of climate that had prevailed in thepast three weeks, with an interest rate structure that was relatively inline with the averages of that period.Chairman Martin commented that the lesser degree of ease indicatedby the directive had been achieved by the Desk, although by a somewhatdifferent route than the directive suggested.Mr. King inquired whether it was fair to say that, if the Deskhad followed literally the Committee's directive of December 19, 1961,regarding a slower rate of increase in total reserves that would haveresulted in more tightness than actually existed, and Mr. Rouse respondedin the affirmative. As the Chairman had stated, the objectives of theCommittee had been achieved, but by a different route than indicated bythe reference to total reserves in the directive. The Committee'sobjectives were achieved by following the last part of the directive whenit became clear that following the total reserves part would have pro-duced results contrary to those objectives.Mr. Rouse then said he had regarded the consensus at the December 19meeting as being in the terms used when the Chairman restated his conceptof the consensus. The Chairman had said at that point that the con-sensus, as he saw it, was along the lines of concentrating on a bill ratein the upper part of the range of 2-1/2 -2-3/4 per cent and trendingtoward a slightly less easy monetary condition, without overt action.Mr. Rouse added that his interpretation of what had been said today,bearing in mind the Treasury's position, was that the consensus would be 1/9/62 -55-along the lines of concentrating on a bill rate of around 2-3/4 per centand maintaining the slightly less easy monetary condition that haddeveloped without overt action.Chairman Martin said that he thought this was about the only waythe matter could be put. However, Mr. Mitchell commented that he thoughtthe maintenance of an even keel should mean not moving in any directionduring a period of Treasury financing. That was not quite the same assaying "a little less ease all the time." Mr. Wayne said he would interpretthe even keel concept as meaning that the Desk would strive to maintainthe position of slightly less ease that had developed, and with thisMr. Mitchell agreed. Mr. Rouse indicated that this was in conformity withthe thought he had expressed previously.Chairman Martin commented that if such a course of action for thenext two weeks was agreed upon, it would appear relatively easy for thegroup consisting of the Secretary, the Account Manager, and the Economistto draft a policy directive that the Committee could consider after theluncheon recess.There was no indication of a view that the drafting should not bealong such lines.At this point Mr. Mills referred to the distribution by theSecretary under date of January 5, 1962, of a draft of statement proposedfor inclusion in the Federal Reserve Bulletin explaining the terminationby the Open Market Committee, at its meeting on December 19, 1961, of the 1/9/62 -56.three statements of operating policies that had been in effect since 1953.This draft had been prepared pursuant to the understanding at theDecember 19 meeting.Mr. Mills said that he would like to direct the Committee's atten-tion to what he considered an erroneous tone of the draft, a tone whichsuggested to him that the termination of the operating policy statementsreflected a conclusion that the original reasons for operating in Treasurybills exclusively had disappeared. His own conception, and he thoughtthere were good grounds for it, was that the operating policy statementswere adopted following a complete review of System open market operationsthat gave primary importance to the thought that monetary policy could bestbe conducted within the framework of a free market. It was felt that thefree market should determine, with as few impediments as possible, the trendof interest rates. Therefore, the policy would be to operate in bills,except as determined by proper decisions of the Committee. He did not feelthat the proposed Bulletin article, in the manner in which it was drafted,brought out that philosophy, as it existed and as it was accepted. If anarticle of this sort should appear in the Bulletin, he believed it woulddo an injustice to Mr. Riefler, the former Secretary of the Committee, andhis dedicated study of this problem, including the papers Mr. Riefler wroteexplaining the operating policies and the reasons for their adoption. Thesame thing might be said with regard to the comments in the paper thatMessrs. Young and Yager wrote more recently and presented at a Harvard 1/9/62 -57-seminar. In his opinion it would be a disservice to permit an article tobe published without taking fully into account the different facets of theSystem' s operating principles.Chairman Martin suggested that the Committee should put down fordiscussion the question whether or not it wanted to have an article pub-lished in the Bulletin. It was not entirely clear, he thought, from theDecember 19 minutes whether the Committee did or did not. The subjectshould be taken up at the next meeting of the Committee for discussion inits entirety.Mr. Treiber noted that the Secretary' s memorandum transmitting thedraft article had suggested the possibility of publication of such anarticle in the January or February issues of the Bulletin. It seemed tohim that it would be advisable to wait at least until the February issue.This was an important subject and should be studied carefully. He inquiredwhether another draft would be envisaged in the light of comments received.Mr. Young replied that the Secretariat was expecting comments andhad in mind preparing a redraft in the light of those comments.In further discussion there was general agreement that publicationof an article in the January issue should not be considered, and the Chairmancommented that the Committee did not need to decide at this time whetherto publish an article in the February issue. In reply to a question, hestated that any comments on the draft should be submitted as promptly asfeasible. 1/9/62 -58-The Chairman then referred to the continuing authority directiveto the Federal Reserve Bank of New York that had been adopted by the Commit-tee at the meeting on December 19, 1961, and inquired of Mr. Rouse whetherthe latter saw need for any change at this time, to which Mr. Rouse repliedin the negative.Mr. Treiber said it was his understanding that the directive wouldcontinue in effect unless the Committee took action to change it in somerespect. If the Committee decided not to make any change, the directivewould remain in effect.Mr. Robertson and Chairman Martin expressed agreement, and therewere no comments to the contrary.Accordingly, it was understood, withoutobjection, that the continuing authoritydirective, as adopted at the December 19meeting of the Committee, would remain ineffect.Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel, entered the room at thispoint.Chairman Martin turned next to the subject of Federal Reserve opera-tions in foreign currencies, stating that in accordance with the understand-ing at the meeting on December 19, 1961, further discussions had now beenheld with the Treasury. From the minutes of the December 19 meeting, hedid not think that the scope of the authorization for further discussionwas entirely clear, except for agreement that the matter should be exploredwith Counsel for the Treasury. He noted that there had now been receivedand distributed to the Committee a letter from Robert H. Knight, General 1/9/62 -59-Counsel of the Treasury, dated January 8, 1962, transmitting a copy of hisopinion to the Secretary of the Treasury with regard to the power underexisting legislation of the Federal Reserve System to conduct operationsin foreign currencies under the proposed plan being considered by the OpenMarket Committee. The Chairman then turned to Mr. Hackley and asked thathe report to the Committee on his discussions with Mr. Knight.Mr. Hackley stated that yesterday afternoon, after some previousdiscussion of the matter, Mr. Knight brought to him a two-page memorandumaddressed to the Secretary of the Treasury in which he expressed generalconcurrence with the legal conclusions set forth in Mr. Hackley' s memorandumto the Open Market Committee of November 22, 1961. Further, as indicatedin his memorandum, Mr. Knight had asked the Department of Justice whetherthe Attorney General concurred in his (Mr. Knight's) opinion, and he hadbeen authorized by that Department to state that the Attorney General didconcur.Mr. Hackley commented that it was gratifying to know that theAttorney General concurred. He added that he would like to make it plainthat he (Mr. Hackley) was satisfied with the legal conclusions reached inhis November 22 memorandum. However, as he had indicated before, he wouldconsider it preferable to have legislation enacted specifically authorizingthe proposed operations in foreign currencies. The Attorney General'sopinion perhaps supported the legal position of the Federal Reserve System;that opinion might make it less necessary to seek legislation. Furthermore, 1/9/62 -60-if legislation was sought but was not enacted, that might politically, ifnot legally, weaken the System's position under present law. Nevertheless,Mr. Hackley said, he would still prefer to have legislation if there couldbe some definite assurance that such legislation would be promptly enacted.Chairman Martin commented at this point that the obtaining of theAttorney General's comments was an outgrowth of a Federal Reserve suggestion,made in the light of points raised by several members during previous discus-sion of the subject by the Open Market Committee.The Chairman then called upon Mr. Young, who said that last weekMr. Knight came to his office, at his (Mr. Knight's) initiative, and askedif he could discuss this whole matter informally. Mr. Knight stated thathe had arrived at a legal opinion that would concur with Mr. Hackley' sopinion. He further indicated, rather vaguely, that he might get the con-curring opinion of the Attorney General. He seemed to have had some con-versations with the Attorney General's Office about the subject. It wasindicated to Mr. Knight that if his own opinion was now firm, it would behelpful to have that opinion available for this meeting of the Open MarketCommittee. Also, if the Attorney General was disposed to concur, it wouldseem helpful to have his concurrence reported at the same time, since therehad been some indication on the part of Committee members that they would beinterested in knowing just what the Attorney General thought about thisproblem.Mr. Young went on to say that Mr. Knight then went into the matterof legislation, which he stated he had been discussing with Mr. Hackley. 1/9/62 -61-Mr. Knight indicated that there were some rather strong reservations atthe Treasury about seeking legislation at this time and gave three groundsfor those reservations. First, the international situation was very tender,particularly with respect to volatile flows of funds. It was not clear justwhat was happening in international markets, but indications from figuresthat had been reported to him at the Treasury were not too favorable. Insuch circumstances, if there were discussions on the Hill, they might beagitating to the markets. Second, to the extent that the problem was oneof obtaining clarifying legislation, it was felt that it might be betterto seek such legislation after the Open Market Committee had had someexperience in order to determine what its problems and limitations were.Presumably and hopefully, its operations in the initial stages would beon a relatively small scale. Third, there was a range of ideas on theHill with regard to the Federal Reserve System, including varying viewswith respect to the operations and the organization of the System. Legis-lation, if sought, might become a vehicle for adding various amendmentsthe nature of which could not be foretold.Mr. Young said that the balance of his discussion with Mr. Knightrelated to problems of organization and relations with the Treasury. Onthe matter of organization, Mr. Knight indicated a Treasury preference foran operation that would be started under the immediate direction of aspecial subcommittee of the full Open Market Committee. In that respect,Mr. Young explained to him the reasons why the original design of the staffproposal had been changed so that the responsibility from the outset would 1/9/62 -62-be in the hands of the full Committee. Mr. Young related to Mr. Knightthe feeling that since this was not an undertaking which, if entered into,it would be easy to withdraw from, it would probably be best from theoutset to go forward with the full Committee having the responsibility.After this explanation Mr. Knight seemed to concur, or at least to besatisfied. Mr. Knight then went into the matter of how responsibilitymight be divided between the Federal Reserve and the Treasury. He advancedvery tentatively an idea of his for discussion and asked whether or not theFederal Reserve staff proposal with regard to the division of responsibilitywas intended as more than a starting point for negotiations. Mr. Youngexplained to him that the proposal, before being presented to the OpenMarket Committee, had been seen by Under Secretary of the Treasury Roosa,not with the idea, however, of getting any commitment. In fact, Mr. Roosawould have been unable to make any commitment because he was not in a posi-tion to consult with his colleagues and with the Secretary of the Treasury.Therefore, the proposal could only be regarded as a beginning point fornegotiations and discussions between the Federal Reserve and the Treasuryif the Open Market Committee decided to go ahead with the program. Mr.Young said he told Mr. Knight that at the moment the Federal Reserve staffwas without any instruction from the Committee to discuss the division ofresponsibilities in any detail. The staff would have to await an instructionfrom the Committee.Chairman Martin said he spent about an hour yesterday with theSecretary of the Treasury and that he thought there had been a fairly good 1/9/62 -63-meeting of the minds. The Secretary went over with him the points Mr. Younghad just presented regarding the question of seeking legislation. As couldbe seen, there were real problems involved. Where he and the Secretarycame out was that on the basis of the concurring legal opinions, and with-out crossing the bridge as to what specific legislation, if any, should besought, the Open Market Committee might want to authorize him (ChairmanMartin) to take the matter up with the Chairman of the House and SenateBanking and Currency Committees in order to get their advice. If the OpenMarket Committee wished to give such authorization, he would then reportback to the Committee on January 23. In this manner, the Open Market Com-mittee would be in a position to have the benefit of some further guidance.If the Committee Chairmen, after hearing Chairman Martin' s explanation,should feel strongly that the introduction of legislation would cause agreat deal of stir, it might be better not to embark on that course. Inthis, he thought the Secretary of the Treasury concurred. Whateveradvantages there might be in System operations in foreign currencies couldbe completely destroyed by a long Congressional debate on the subject.The Chairman then commented that apparently there would be somepublicity even if the System should decide to move forward withoutCongressional sanction in the form of specific legislation. If he under-stood correctly, the Board would have to make an amendment to one of itsregulations.Mr. Hackley responded that the Board would have to make an amend-ment to Regulation N, Relationships with Foreign Banks and Bankers, and 1/9/62 -64-certain instructions would have to be issued by the Federal Open MarketCommittee. It would seem to be a matter of judgment whether those instruc-tions should be made public.Chairman Martin noted that a delicate problem was involved, partic-ularly in view of the balance-of-payments information that would be comingout at the middle of the month. He suggested that the opinion of theTreasury's General Counsel be studied in conjunction with the opinion ofMr. Hackley. Also, he would propose, if the Committee was willing, to explorethis matter with the Chairman of the Banking and Currency Committees and toreport back to the Open Market Committee. Then there could be a full discus-sion at the next Committee meeting against the background of whatever he(Chairman Martin) could develop from the discussions with the CommitteeChairmen.Mr. Treiber said he considered this a very important matter, onwhich it was important to move forward. He thought it would be highlydesirable for Chairman Martin to talk with the Chairmen of the Bankingand Currency Committees.Mr. Mitchell observed that none of the people being consulted,including the Chairmen of the Banking and Currency Committees, wouldappear to have anywhere near the same stake in the matter, in terms ofprestige and public relations, as the Federal Reserve. If the FederalReserve got into the proposed operations via the back door and made amistake, particularly with no precedent for such operations over a periodof 30 or 40 years, he felt that the reverberations would be serious. No 1/9/62 -65-one else had reason to be nearly as concerned as the System itself.If a mistake should be made, everyone would say that it was the FederalReserve that did it. Therefore, before making a move of this sort, hefelt that the possible public relations reaction should be consideredfully.Chairman Martin responded that the point was well taken. Hesimply would like to inject the thought that if a crisis should develop inthis field and the Federal Reserve was not alert to it, the repercussionscould be equally severe.Mr. Mitchell then inquired about the progress being made indeveloping draft legislation, to which Mr. Hackley replied that the draftprepared prior to the December 19 meeting had since been re-worked tosome extent. It had been discussed with the legal staff of the New YorkBank, and the Bank was satisfied. He felt that the Federal Reserve wouldbe prepared to go forward with a request for legislation fairly promptlyif such a course should be decided upon.Chairman Martin agreed, adding that the question came down towhether legislation should or should not be sought.Mr. King commented that the reservations expressed by the Treasuryappeared to be based on apprehension as to what might happen if legislationwere requested. He went on to say that he would want to be cooperative withany Treasury or any Administration. However, it appeared to him thatbecause of apprehension as to what might happen if legislation were sought,the Federal Reserve might be asked to take all of the responsibility, and 1/9/62 -66-he would have a question about cooperating to that extent. It shouldbe recognized, he thought, that all of the opinions that had beenexpressed came from more or less a common base and might not necessarilybe thoroughly objective. He agreed that the thing to do next was totalk with the Chairmen of the Banking and Currency Committees. However,he was inclined to think that the Federal Reserve was being asked to goa little too far in the name of cooperation. As he understood it, theTreasury was suggesting that it might not favor seeking legislationbecause of apprehension as to the outcome.Chairman Martin responded that he wished to make it clear that noone had asked the Federal Reserve for its cooperation. To date, all ofthe impetus had come from the Federal Reserve. It had approached theTreasury; the Treasury had not approached the System. When the Treasurywas approached, however, it was entitled to raise a question. This ques-tion was whether it might not be inadvisable to do anything. In that case,the Treasury might want to use the Stabilization Fund entirely.It should be kept clear, the Chairman continued, that the proposalnow before the Committee had been developed within the Board and the NewYork Bank. It had been discussed over a period of several months. Everyeffort had been made to give each member of the Open Market Committee anopportunity to express his opinion on the matter, and no final decision ofany sort had yet been made. There were certainly questions involved in theproposal. However, he (Chairman Martin) happened to believe that the world 1/9/62 -67-had changed, in fact much more than he understood, and he was convincedthat this job was going to have to be done by somebody, whether it be theStabilization Fund or the Federal Reserve. Mr. Thomas, he noted, hadsubmitted a good memorandum on the rationale for such a program beingundertaken by the Federal Reserve, but the point had not been resolved asyet. In any event, however, nobody had asked the Federal Reserve for itscooperation or made any request.In reply to a question by Mr. Mitchell regarding how Under SecretaryRoosa had entered into the picture, Mr. Young recalled that last summer heand Mr. Furth prepared a memorandum in which operations in foreign currencieswere proposed. It was then suggested that an operational framework for suchoperations be designed, and additional memoranda, as distributed to theCommittee, were prepared for that purpose. It was in connection with thatwork that at one point he told Mr. Roosa in confidence of the assignmenton which he (Mr. Young) was then engaged.After further discussion, Mr. Mills said that he would like tosecond the proposal that Chairman Martin be authorized to contact theChairmen of the House and Senate Banking and Currency Committees to acquaintthem with the problem and with the approach that the System might be makingto operations in foreign currencies, and to obtain their reaction.Chairman Martin added that, if so authorized, he would like toreport back to the Open Market Committee at its next meeting and to havea full discussion by the Committee of the whole problem. 1/9/62 -68-The Chairman then inquired whether there were any objections toproceeding in this manner. No objection being indicated, it was under-stood that he would contact the Chairmen of the Banking and CurrencyCommittees for the purpose indicated and that he would then report backto the Open Market Committee at its next meeting.In this connection, Chairman Martin said it should be made clearthat at this point no commitment was being made to anyone.It was agreed that the next meeting of the Open Market Committeewould be held on Tuesday, January 23, 1962, and that succeeding meetingswould be scheduled for Tuesday, February 13, and Tuesday, March 6, thelatter to be the annual organization meeting of the Committee.Mr. Treiber noted that at the December 19 meeting Mr. Thomas hadreferred to the effect of adoption of the continuing authority directiveon certain operating authorities that are customarily reaffirmed each yearat the Committee's organization meeting. He said that, if desired, hewould be prepared to comment on that subject at this meeting.Chairman Martin suggested, however, that the subject be deferreduntil another meeting of the Committee, and there was agreement with thissuggestion.The meeting then recessed and reconvened at 2:15 p.m., with thesame attendance as at the beginning of the morning session.There were distributed copies of a draft of proposed currenteconomic policy directive to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York that 1/9/62 -69-had been prepared by the Secretary, Account Manager, and Economist. Thedraft read as follows:It is the current policy of the Committee to permit furtherbank credit and monetary expansion so as to promote fuller uti-lization of the economy's resources, together with money marketconditions consistent with the needs of an expanding domesticeconomy, taking into account this country's adverse balance ofpayments as well as the Treasury financing calendar.To implement this policy, operations for the System OpenMarket Account during the next two weeks shall be conductedwith a view to maintaining the generally less easy monetaryconditions that have prevailed in recent weeks, and to continu-ing the rate on three-month Treasury bills within the recentrange, without overt action to change unduly the supply ofreserves or the level of interest rates.In reply to a question whether the Account Manager felt that hecould operate satisfactorily under a directive along the lines drafted,Mr. Rouse stated that he could.In a discussion that ensued concerning the language of the proposeddirective, certain changes were suggested. It developed that a majorityfavored eliminating the final clause, beginning with the words "withoutovert action," Those supporting the elimination of this language sug-gested, in essence, that it was unnecessary or redundant in view of thepreceding phraseology, that it might convey unintended implications, andthat it might inhibit the Manager if certain actions were deemed necessaryto carry out other portions of the directive. A minority view, favoringretention of the language, was based on the thought that the language hadbeen included in the directive issued following the December 19 meeting,that its elimination of this particular time might be misunderstood, and 1/9/62 -70-that it pointed up the desire of the Committee that an even keel be main-tained during the forthcoming two weeks.There was general agreement with a suggestion that the words"generally less easy" be stricken from the portion of the directivereferring to conditions that had prevailed in recent weeks, and that theDesk should seek to maintain during the ensuing two weeks, inasmuch asthose words would seem to convey the impression of a more pronounced shiftin money market conditions than the Committee had had in mind at theDecember 19 meeting, and possibly also the impression that same furthershift was contemplated during the next two weeks.There was likewise general agreement with a suggestion that theterm "money market conditions," as used in the first paragraph of the draft,be changed to "monetary conditions," and that, conversely, the term"monetary conditions," as used in the second paragraph, be changed to"money market conditions."In the course of the comments on the directive, Mr. Millsrecalled that at the December 19 meeting he had dissented from the adoptionof a procedure whereby the policy directive, in its then-existing form,would be separated into a continuing authority directive and a currentpolicy directive, with the latter to be drafted and acted upon before theadjournment of each meeting. He felt that his grounds for dissent werevalidated by the difficulty being experienced in issuing a current policydirective, as exemplified by the discussion that had occurred today regarding 1/9/62 -71-the directive issued following the December 19 meeting. However, inasmuchas a majority of the Committee had adopted the procedure, he would commenton the draft directive now before the Committee for consideration. Hefelt that there was a conflict in terms and tone as between the firstand second paragraphs. In the first, reference was made to permittingfurther bank credit and monetary expansion so as to promote fullerutilization of the economy's resources, whereas the second paragraphindicated that there should be less ease. He would prefer, in thefirst paragraph, to say that the Committee' s current policy was to "permitfurther expansion of bank loans, together with money market conditionsconsistent with the needs of an expanding domestic economy, ..."Mr. Shepardson indicated that he was inclined to agree withMr. Mills.Mr. Robertson said that he opposed the pinning of monetarypolicy to a bill rate, although his objection would not be as strong ata time, like the present, when the Committee was seeking to maintain aneven keel. He favored retention of the words admonishing against overtaction, but suggested that the word "alter" be substituted for "changeunduly."With reference to the changes that had been suggested in the firstparagraph, Mr. Robertson pointed out that changes from the preceding direc-tive, if made at this time, might seem to indicate an actual shift in policyrather than an intent to maintain an even keel, and other Committee membersexpressed agreement. Further comments included discussion of a question raised byMr. King as to whether the language of the draft directive implied toomuch power on the part of the Federal Reserve to control the bill rate.Several additional suggestions then were made for amendment ofthe draft directive with a view to reflecting clearly the current policyof the Committee and the manner of its implementation for the next twoweeks. The language set forth hereinafter was then suggested and wasread in full by the Secretary, following which the Chairman inquiredwhether anyone would wish to be recorded as dissenting from the issuanceof a directive phrased in such manner, and no indications of dissent wereheard.Accordingly, the Federal Reserve Bank ofNew York was authorized and directed, untilotherwise directed by the Committee, to executetransactions for the System Open Market Accountin accordance with the following current economicpolicy directive:It is the current policy of the Committee to permit furtherbank credit and monetary expansion so as to promote fuller uti-lization of the economy' s resources, together with monetaryconditions consistent with the needs of an expanding domesticeconomy, taking into account this country's adverse balance ofpayments as well as the Treasury financing calendar.To implement this policy, operations for the System OpenMarket Account during the next two weeks shall be conductedwith a view to maintaining current money market conditions,without action to alter the level of interest rates.Votes for this action: Messrs. Martin,Balderston, Irons, King, Mills, Mitchell,Robertson, Shepardson, Swan, Wayne, Fulton,and Treiber. Votes against this action: None.The meeting then adjourned.Secretary1/9/62-72-