 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Systemin Washington on Tuesday, December 3, 1963, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Martin, ChairmanMr. Hayes, Vice ChairmanMr. BalderstonMr. BoppMr. ClayMr. IronsMr. MillsMr. MitchellMr. RobertsonMr. ScanlonMr. ShepardsonMessrs. Hickman, Wayne, Shuford, and Swan, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Ellis and Deming, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Boston and Minneapolis,respectivelyMr. Young, SecretaryMr. Sherman, Assistant SecretaryMr. Kenyon, Assistant SecretaryMr. Hexter, Assistant General CounselMr. Noyes, EconomistMessrs. Baughman, Brill, Eastburn, Furth, Garvy,Green, Holland, Koch, and Tow, AssociateEconomistsMr. Stone, Manager, System Open Market AccountMr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open MarketAccountMr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of GovernorsMr. Broida, Assistant Secretary, Board of GovernorsMr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Yager, Chief, Gcvernment Finance Section,Division of Research and Statistics, Board ofGovernorsMiss Eaton, Secretary, Office of the Secretary,Board of Governors 12/3/63Mr. Patterson, First Vice President, FederalReserve Bank of AtlantaMessrs. Mann, Ratchford, Taylor, Jones, Parsons,and Grove, Vice Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Cleveland, Richmond,Atlanta, St. Louis, Minneapolis, and SanFrancisco, respectivelyMr. Eisenmenger, Director of Research, FederalReserve Bank of BostonMr. Cooper, Manager, Securities Department,Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkUpon motion duly made and seconded,and by unanimous vote, the minutes of themeeting of the Federal Open Market Com-mittee held on October 22, 1963, wereapproved.Upon motion duly made and seconded,and by unanimous vote, the action ofmembers of the Federal Open Market Com-mittee on November 22, 1963, in approvingincreases of $50 million each inreciprocal currency arrangements with theSwiss National Bank and the Bank forInternational Settlements. effective asof Monday, November 25, 1963, was approved,ratified, and confirmed.Befcre this meeting there had been distributed to the membersof the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System OpenMarket Account on foreign exchange market conditions and on Open MarketAccount and Treasury operations in foreign currencies for the periodNovember 12 through November 27, 1963, together with a supplementalreport covering November 28 through December 2, 1963. Copies of thesereports have been placed in the files of the Committee.Supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs stated that theTreasury gold stock would remain unchanged for the sixteenth week in a 12/3/63 -3-row. The Stabilization Fund now had on hand $65 million of gold,which should be enough to meet demands for at least the next week orso. Over the past few months the Russian gold acquired by theStabilization Fund had been quickly absorbed in purchases by theFrench, the Argentines, and the Austrians. In fact, on Thursday,November 21, the day before President Kennedy's assassination, theStabilization Fund was out of gold completely, although there was inprospect a sizable distribution from the London Gold Pool early inDecember. To bridge the gap, the Federal Reserve Bank of New Yorkarranged for the Treasury a gold swap with the Bank for InternationalSettlements in the amount of $30 million, which was paid into theStabilization Fund on Friday, November 22. Consequently, it waspossible to avoid a reduction in the gold stock on the followingWednesday. This gold swap would be reversed today, Mr. Coombs said,when the Stabilization Fund took delivery on the U. S. share of theGold Pool's November acquisitions, amounting to $68 million.Mr. Coombs commented that temporary gold swaps with the Bankfor International Settlements had proved to be another useful pieceof machinery. There had been no idea that gold swaps would serve apurpose such as this when they first had been developed on anexploratory basis a year or so ago.Over the past ten days, Mr. Coombs continued, the System'sgross drawings on the swap network had built up still further. The 12/3/63Account was now in debt to the Swiss to the extent of $150 million,the Dutch for $80 million, the Germans for $102 million, theCanadians for $20 million, and the Belgians for $10 million, makinga gross total of $362 million. The swap drawing with France wasexcluded from this accounting since it was fully covered by forwardpurchases of French francs. The Italians had drawn $50 million,leaving the Account in a net debtor position of $312 million. Duringthe past three or four days, however, the Account had maintained itsposition pretty well in all currencies except the German mark.Mr. Coombs thought German banks and industrial firms might.make further efforts before the end of the year to improve theiryear-end balance sheet positions. There were a good many rumors, hesaid, about impaired liquidity positions of a number of German firms,and these firms were trying to protect themselves. This would tendto result in a flow of dollars to the Bundesbank and the Accountmight have to draw further on the German swap to mop up these dollars.On the other hand, the German Government might be making sizable pay-ments in December for military procurement in the United States,possibly totaling as much as $150 million. Part of these paymentsmight be available for reducing some of the System's swap drawings.In any case, there was reason to expect a return flow of dollars fromGermany after the year end; the present discount on the one-month markindicated that forward cover was being sought for this purpose. 12/3/63 -5-In the case of the Swiss franc, Mr. Coombs continued, somefurther window dressing might also develop and some additional swapdrawings in moderate volume might be required in consequence. Hewas hopeful, however, that in the Swiss as well as in the German caseit would be possible to make steady progress in paying off the System'sswap drawings after the turn of the year. He was even more hopefulthat the Account could extricate itself after the year-end from it.sdebtor position in Dutch guilders. It might be possible to repay theCanadian drawing in December, when the Canadian dollar generally tendsto be weak. With respect to drawings by other central banks, Mr. Coombsthought that the Bank of Italy might make another sizable drawing duringDecember. The Bank of England might also wish to draw on the swap lineto help finance their heavy year-end debt payments to the U. S. andCanada.Following this report, Mr. Coombs responded to questions byMr. Ellis regarding certain recent operations of the Gold Pool.Thereupon, upon motion duly madeand seconded, and by unanimous vote,the System Open Market Account trans-actions in foreign currencies duringthe period November 12 through December2, 1963, were approved, ratified, andconfirmed.Mr. Coombs recommended a renewal on a 6-month basis of theexisting $50 million swap arrangement with the National Bank of Belgium, 12/3/63 -6-which had last been renewed on June 20, 1963, and which matured onDecember 20, 1963.Renewal of the swap arrangementwith the National Bank of Belgium fora further 6-month period was approved.Mr. Coombs said that he thought the time had now come when theSystem might appropriately suggest to the Bank of France an increasein the swap line from $100 million to $150 million or, preferably, to$200 million. As he had mentioned at the Committee meeting ofNovember 12, 1963, there were recent indications that the French mightbe sympathetic to an increase, and he suspected that they might beeven more sympathetic after the events of the past 10 days. Herecommended that the Committee authorize regotiations with the Bark ofFrance along those lines. If the negotiations were successful, hethought. it would be desirable to announce them simultaneously with anannouncement of the recent increases in the swap lines with the Bankfor International Settlements and the Swiss National Bank. With anincrease in the French swap line, he thought the swap network would bepretty well rounded out for the time being, both as to geographicalcoverage and in terms of over-all amounts.Mr. Mills asked why the United States should make the advancein negotiating an increase in the French swap line. Given the state ofrelationships between the French Government and the United StatesGovernment, he thought it would be preferable to let the French make 12/3/63 -7-the advance. He saw no urgent reason for increasing the swap line; itwas simply a matter of convenience and tidying up the arrangements.The whole tide of events as described today, he said, appeared to bemoving rather rapidly to the point where foreign central banks wouldbe drawing on the swap arrangements to strengthen their currencies.In reply, Mr. Coombs commented that he hoped the tide wouldmove in the direction indicated. The proposed negotiation, he added,was not between the French Government and the U. S. Government, butbetween the Federal Reserve and the Bank of France. The swap arrange-ments were divorced from politics.Mr. Mills commented that the central banks were creatures oftheir governments, and he found it difficult to make a distinction.Mr. Mills then asked whether the statement Mr. Coombs had madeat the time the Japanese arrangement was entered into, to the effectthat such an arrangement would round out the swap network, had beenintended to imply that the arrangements would be complete only in ageographic sense, or also that they would be complete in terms ofdollar amounts of individual swap lines. Mr. Coombs replied that hehad meant complete in the geographic sense, and that he had left openthe possibility of later recommendations for increases in individualswap lines.Thereupon, negotiation of an in-crease in the swap line with the Bankof France from $100 million to $200million was authorized. 12/3/63Mr. Coombs noted that earlier in the meeting the Committeehad ratified the increases, effective November 25, of $50 millioneach in the swap lines with the Swiss National Bank and the Bank forInternational Settlements. These increases raised the total amountof individually authorized lines from $1.95 billion to $2.05 billion.He recommended that a corresponding change be made in limit on theaggregate anount of foreign currencies held under reciprocal currencyarrangements, as specified in the first paragraph of the Committee'scontinuing authority directive for foreign currency operations.Thereupon, upon motion duly madeand seconded, and by unanimous vote,the continuing authority directive wasamended as follows:The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is authorized anddirected to purchase and sell through spot transactions anyor all of the following currencies in accordance with theGuidelines on System Foreign Currency Operations reaffirmedby the Federal Open Market Committee on March 5, 1963, asamended May 28, 1963; provided that the aggregate amount offoreign currencies held under reciprocal currency arrange-ments shall not exceed $2.05 billion equivalent at any onetime, and provided further that the aggregate amount offcreign currencies held as a result of outright purchasesshall not exceed $150 million equivalent at any one time:Pounds sterlingFrench francsGerman marksItalian lireNetherlands guildersSwiss francsBelgian francsCanadian dollarsAustrian schillingsSwedish kronorJapanese yen 12/3/63The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is also authorizedand directed to operate in any or all of the foregoingcurrencies in accordance with the Guidelines and up to acombined total of $150 million equivalent, by means of:(a) purchases through forward transactions, forthe purpose of allowing greater flexibilityin covering commitments under reciprocalcurrency agreements;(b) purchases and sales through forward as wellas spot transactions, for the purpose ofutilizing its holdings of one currency forthe settlement of commitments denominated inother currencies; and(c) purchases through spot transactions and salesthrough forward transactions, for the purposeof restraining short-term outflows of fundsinduced by arbitrage considerations.The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is also authorizedand directed to make purchases through spot transactions,including purchases from the U. S. Stabilization Fund, andconcurrent sales through forward transactions to the U. S.Stabilization Fund, of any of the foregoing currencies inwhich the U. S. Treasury has outstanding indebtedness, inaccordance with the Guidelines and up to a total of $100million equivalent. Purchases may be at rates above par,and both purchases and sales are to be made at the samerates.Before this meeting there had been distributed to the membersof the Committee a report from the Manager of the System Open MarketAccount covering open market operations in U. S. Government securitiesand bankers' acceptances for the period November 12 through November 27,1963, together with a supplemental report covering the periodNovember 28 through December 2, 1963. Copies of these reports havebeen placed in the files of the Committee. In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Stone commentedas follows:In the first half of the period since the Committee'sNovember 12 meeting--that is, in the week and a half priorto the assassination--the markets were enjoying an appreci-able improvement in atmosphere from the heavy tone that hadcharacterized the preceding several weeks. That tone wasjust beginning to brighten at about the time of theNovember 12 meeting following the sizable purchase ofTreasury bills undertaken by the Trading Desk for varioustrust fund accounts on November 8. Soon afterward, themarket drew added strength from the Treasury's November 13announcement of a $100 million reduction in the forthcoming3-month bill issue in light of current international raterelationships, and from the publication of improved balanceof payments data for the third quarter of 1963. Incombination, these developments suggested to the marketthat international factors did not call for a furtherfirming of credit policy or hardening of short-term ratesand that the upward rate movement of earlier weeks may havebeen overdone. As the period progressed, sizable Systempurchases of bills to supply reserves cut down dealers'large inventories and added to the market's feeling ofconfidence. Under these influences, the bid rate on 3-month bills declined from 3.58 per cent on November 13 to3.47 per cent by November 22. The 6-month bill was downfrom a high point of 3.69 per cent on November 12-13 to3.64 per cent by November 22, In recent days both rateshave undergone the customary seasonal rise, with the aver-age issuing rates for 3- and 6-month bills at 3.53 and 3,67per cent, respectively, in yesterday's auction.The improvement in atmosphere that developed in thebill market also spread to coupon-bearing issues of allmaturities as the lower prices that had emerged in recentweeks attracted moderate investor interest and as dealerssought to cover short positions in some issues. ByNovember 22, prices of a number of intermediate- andlonger-term Treasury issues were roughly 1/4 to 1/2 pointhigher than on November 8, and dealer positions had workeddown to the point where they could no longer be regardedas unusually large. The new 18-month 3-7/8 per cent note,which was bid at a shade under par in when-issued trading12/3/63-10- on November 8, climbed to a par bid by the November 15 pay-ment date and was quoted slightly abcve par by November 22.Since that time prices have drifted slightly lower inrelatively light activity.The Committee of course knows of the splendid perform-ance put on by the market both when the shattering news ofthe President's assassination was received and when themarket reopened the following Tuesday. Among the majorfactors contributing to that kind of performance was afeeling that there was no reason for any marked change infinancial values--or if there was, no one had any convictionsas to the direction such a change should take. Anotherimportant factor was the relatively unruffled performance ofthe foreign exchange markets. I should like also to recorda rather fundamental influence that underlay the calmatmosphere of the market on Tuesday, when the enormity ofwhat had happened over the week-end was fully comprehended.This fundamental influence was a strong and active sense ofindividual responsibility on the part of virtually everyparticipant in the market. Everyone, in those circumstances,sought to act constructively and to avoid any action thatmight have adverse effects on the market. Finally, theswift and smooth accession of Mr. Johnson to the presidencyimparted a strong sense of continuity and contributedsubstantially to the calm and confident atmosphere thatenveloped the market on that critical Tuesday.Thereupon, upon motion duly madeand seconded, and by unanimous vote,the open market transactions inGovernment securities and bankers'acceptances during the period November12 through December 2, 1963, wereapproved, ratified, and confirmed.Mr. Stone then noted that he and Mr. Farrell, Director of theBoard's Division of Bank Operations, had distributed a memorandumdated November 27, 1963 to the Committee on procedures with respect toallocations of the System Open Market Account. (Note: A copy of thismemorandum has been placed in the files of the Committee.) The purposewas to call to the Committee's attention the fact that the procedure12/3/63-11- 12/3/63adopted by the Committee in September 1963 might result, over thenext few weeks, in some Federal Reserve Bank or Banks incurring areserve deficiency on days other than statement dates. He summarizedthree alternatives set forth in the memorandum that seemed to beavailable to the Committee.Chairman Martin observed that the meeting scheduled for thatafternoon between the Board of Governors and Federal Reserve BankPresidents seemed to him to provide an appropriate opportunity todiscuss this matter, and he asked Mr. Stone to be present at thatmeeting.Secretary's Note: The discussion of thissubject in the afternoon meeting betweenthe Board of Governors and the Presidentsof the Federal Reserve Banks is reportedin the minutes of that meeting. Asindicated in those minutes, the meetingof the Federal Open Market Committee wasreconvened following this discussion.Upon motion duly made and seconded, and byunanimous vote, the procedures with respectto allocations of the System Open MarketAccount were revised, effective December 3,1963, as follows:1. Securities in the System Open Market Account shall bereallocated on the last business day of each statement weekand of each month by means of adjustments proportionate to theadjustments that would have been required to equalize approxi-mately the average combined reserve ratios of the 12 FederalReserve Banks based on the most recent available five businessdays' reserve ratio figures.2. The Board's staff shall calculate, in the morning ofeach business day, the reserve ratios of each Bank after-12- 12/3/63allowing for the indicated effects of the settlement of theInterdistrict Settlement Fund for the preceding day. Ifthese calculations should disclose a deficiency in thereserve ratio of any Bank, the Board's staff shall informthe Manager of the System Open Market Account, who shallmake a special adjustment as of the previous day to restorethe combined reserve ratio of that Bank to the average ofall the Banks or to such higher level as may be necessaryto eliminate the deficiency in note or deposit reserves.However, such adjustments shall not be made beyond the pointwhere a deficiency would be created at. any other Bank. Suchadjustments shall be offset against the participation of theBank or Banks best able to absorb the additional amount or,at the discretion of the Manager, against the participationof the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The Board's staffand the Bank or Banks concerned shall then be notified ofthe amounts involved and the Interdistrict Settlement Fundshall be closed after giving effect to the adjustments asof the preceding business day.3. Until the next reallocation the Account shall beapportioned on the basis of the ratios determined in para-graph 1, after allowing for any adjustments as provided forin paragraph 2.4. Profits and losses on the sale of securities fromthe Account shall be allocated cn the day of delivery ofthe securities sold on the basis of each Bank's currentholding at the opening of business on that day.Chairman Martin then called for the staff economic and financialreports, supplementing the written reports that had been distributedprior to the meeting, copies of which have been placed in the files ofthe Committee.Mr. Noyes commented on economic conditions as follows:Obviously the assassination of President Kennedy was anevent of great economic as well as human and politicalsignificance. But it would be presumptuous at this point forme to even attempt to assess the longer range economicimplications of the resulting changes in our national leader-ship. A few facts of economic significance about events ofthe last ter days may be noted. We have seen a rapid return-13- 12/3/63to normalcy in markets of all kinds. This suggests to methat there is some depth and resilience on both sides of bothfinancial and product markets. Such a situation is certainlya healthy one, for which we can all be grateful. Itencourages us to believe that the economy will continue toadjust rationally to economically significant developmentsas they actually transpire--whether they stem from privateor public sources. In other words, it seems reasonable toconclude that the economy will respond to either stimulativeor restraining changes in policy in the normal ways in whichone would expect a free enterprise economy to adjust.Specifically, the behavior of markets during this crisiswould seem to me to confirm that the response to any changein monetary policy at this time in either direction would beal.ong the lines one would normally expect from such a policychange--not perverse or of an exaggerated magnitude.We do not yet have enough information to measure theimmediate economic impact of the President's death and theperiod of national mourning that followed. It is obviousthat retail sales were adversely affected in both the weeksending November 23d and 30th. The effect was probably largeenough to cause sales for November as a whole to be belowanticipated levels. This seems to be widely understood,however, and it is doubtful that the relatively poor showingwill have much effect on business confidence when it isconfirmed by the official figures in 10 days or so.By and large, the additional data that have becomeavailable since the last meeting, almost all of which relatesto October, tends to support the favorable appraisal of theoutlook that is becoming more widely accepted as each daypasses. Auto sales in the first 20 days of November wereoff a little, but are still at a high rate. Housing startsbrke out on the high side in October--and even if they wereattributable in large part to unusually favorable weather,it is hard not to be impressed by the fact that builderswere prepared to start so many units in any kind of weather.Orders for steel continue strong, especially from the autoindustry, but appliance and construction demand is alsowell maintained.We have all said from time to time that price develop-ments will bear close watching and we are watching them asclosely as we know how. In the staff they have beenintensively reviewed at both the domestic and internationallevels. There is no doubt that international commodityprices have strengthened, in part because of shortfalls in-14- 12/3/63output, especially in Iron Curtain countries. There is alsono doubt that several important continental countries areconfronted with serious internal inflationary developments.Further, it is clear that the net change in domestic prices,while very moderate on the average, is upward. The latestchange in the consumer price index is described as largelyseasonal, but it is up a little, as was the latest changein the wholesale prices. Firming seems to be the word thatbest characterizes recent price developments, and thisfirmer tone in the markets for their products has con-tributed to the more optimistic outlook of many businessmen.In fact, it is doubtful that we could have achieved thepresent levels of output and investment without someimprovement in the price outlook, as viewed by the business-man. The situation still does not seem to me to be one thatcan properly be characterized as inflationary, and expecta-tions could shift rapidly, as they have during other recentwinters.This leads me directly to the one word of caution thatseems appropriate at this time. No matter what we do to thefigures by way of statistical adjustment, we cannot eliminatethe actual seasonal midwinter decline in the pace of economicactivity. Even though the seasonally adjusted figurescontinue to rise, we know that the actual rates of output andemployment in some lines are almost certain to go down inJanuary and February, and that these actual declines carrywith them a lessening of confidence in the outlook, no matterhow often we remind people that they are "only" seasonal.Therefore, any move toward lesser ease at this time is likelyto coincide in the eyes of observers with the midwinter lullin general economic activity. There is some advantage indeferring any significant change in policy until we see howthe economy, and the current wave of business optimism,survives the rigors of winter.Mr. Koch made the following statement on financial developments:I shall summarize briefly today recent financial develop-ments and then talk a little about the course of some of thebroad indicators of monetary policy since about midyear.Domestic financial markets took the tragic news ofPresident Kennedy's assassination fairly smoothly, verysmoothly if one excludes the sharp decline of stock prices ina brief period on that fateful Friday afternoon and the sharprebound on the following Tuesday. Since then, stock prices-15-. 12/3/63 -16-have risen further, suggesting business and financial con-fidence in the new administration. The Governmentsecurities market performed very well, with retail sellingsmall and with bond and bill yields both steady at levelssomewhat. below their highs for the current expansion.Looking beyond the most immediate past, one of themost striking developments has been the marked pickup inbusiness borrowing from banks. Such borrowing has averagedfrom a half to three-quarters of a billion dollars morethan seasonal in each of the last three months. Outstand-ing real estate and consumer loans at banks have also ex-perienced sharp further advances.But with reserves less readily available, prior toNovember banks met their increased loan demands by reducingtheir Government security portfolios substantially. InNovember bank holdings of Governments increased, butperhaps temporarily due to new Treasury financing. Banksalso are curtailing their acquisitions, of municipal securi-ties somewhat. This is a typical course of bank portfolioadjustments in a period of business expansion with lessenedreserve availability.Capital market financing by corporations and munici-palities dropped off in November, but the new issue calendarfor corporations in December will again be large, partly forseasonal reasons. Corporate and municipal bond yields, likeGovernment yields, have changed little since the death ofthe President.Morey supply growth has continued at a rapid pace,approximating a billion dollars in the first half of Novem-ber. This followed a rise of a similar amount in October.More recent data on required reserves behind private depositssuggest a further moderate rise in the money supply in thelast half of November. Growth in time and savings depositsof individuals slackened a bit in November, reflecting inpart earlier than usual withdrawals of Christmas Clubaccounts, but the larger banks continue to bid aggressivelyfor certificate of deposit money from corporations.As for bank reserve positions, they seem to have beenunder slightly less pressure than earlier. Free reserves,for example, have averaged about $100 million recently, ascompared with about $50 million for a few weeks in October.Moreover, preliminary estimates of free reserves havegenerally been above final revised figures, and these earlyfigures were probably a more accurate indicator of the moneymarket conditions that actually prevailed than were the later 12/3/63ones, which involved mainly increased required reserves atthe country banks. Required reserves behind privatedeposits continue to average significantly above the guide-line figures computed from a late July base. But thisexcess has developed in large part because of a sharpdecline in Government deposits. Total reserves haveincreased at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of less than1-1/2 per cent since midyear. Since borrowings are up overthis period, nonborrowed reserves are actually down frommidyear.Let me now turn to the interrelationships among thevarious broad indicators of monetary policy, namely, bankreserves, bank credit, the money supply, and interest rates.The recent course of these indicators deserves separateattenton, first, from midyear through October and, second,in November alone.Growth in total reserves and in bank credit slackenedmarkedly from midyear through October. Total loans andinvestments at commercial banks, for example, increased ata seasonally adjusted annual rate of 5-1/2 per cent overthe three months ending with October, as compared with7-1/2 per cent earlier in the year, and 9 per cent lastyear.On the other hand, growth in required reserves behindprivate deposits and in the money supply picked up afterJuly. The money supply increase averaged about 3-1/2 percent on an annual rate basis over the three months endingwith October, as compared with 3-1/4 per cent earlier inthe year and 1-1/2 per cent in 1962. Interest rates con-tinued a moderate upward trend through October.How can these changes be reconciled? In the firstplace, the increased rate of rise in the narrowly definedmoney supply occurred despite the slackening in bank creditexpansion, It reflected in the main sharply reduced U. S.Government deposits and a somewhat reduced rate of increasein time and savings deposits, neither of which are includedin the money supply. The interest rate rise reflected thereduced rates of expansion in savings and in bank credit--with loans rising more than seasonally but with banksliquidating Governments contraseasonally. The rise alsoreflected expectations of higher rates and possibly a lesseasy monetary policy,The relationships among bank reserves, bank credit,money and interest rates had to be different after October,if only because Government deposits had declined sharply to-17- 12/3/63 -18-a low level. If growth in the money supply were to continueat the pre-November rate, the expansion in total reserves andbank credit had to be larger, or time and savings depositgrowth had to slacken markedly.As we have seen, the course of the major monetary policyindicators did follow a more consistent course in November,with total reserves and bank credit expanding sharply alongwith the money supply. The main reason for this difference inNovember from earlier months seems to me to lie in Governmentfinancial behavior with Treasury balances no longer beingdrawn down and with new Federal financing, in part underwrittenby the banks, on the rise. With monetary policy unchanged andin practice following a free reserve guide that put reservesinto the market to preserve a relatively steady tone and feelof the money market, the larger over-all demands for bankfinancing and cash balances--on the part of the Treasury aswell as the general public--were met without further upwardpressure on interest rates. Contributing to this stabilityof rates was also the changed market expectations as toofficial attitudes about appropriate short-term rate levels.Prior to November the reduced rate of expansion in totalreserves and bank credit had led me to believe that perhaps aslightly easier monetary policy was appropriate. Novemberdevelopments suggest that some easing may actually haveoccurred In any case, with the political and economicoutlook still uncertain, recent developments suggest to mea course of watchful waiting, maintaining approximately thecurrent monetary posture, at least until we can see howstrong are the cyclical demands for bank credit and moneyafter the seasonal forces shift from expansion to contractionafter about Christmas. If these cyclical demands prove verystrong ard lead to financial excesses or upward price pressures,they will warrant curbing. If they are not strong and if theseasonal contraction is marked, additional monetary stimula-tion may well be called for.Mr. Furth made the following statement on the balance of payments:In the field of international finance, as in all others,developments during the past few weeks have been overshadowedby the death of President Kennedy and the advent of a newadministration.Until the third week of November, U. S. internationalpayments seemed to present the same moderately encouraging 12/3/63picture as during the third quarter and the month of October.The disappointingly large deficit for the week endingNovember 20--$150 million--reportedly was in large measuredue to window-dressing operations of a Canadian bank whosefiscal year ended on November 30; and the result for thefollowing week--a deficit of $90 million--obviously givesno clues as to the future.In Continental Europe, moves toward tighter monetarypolicies contradicted statements made at the recent WorkingParty 3 meeting but nevertheless did not come unexpectedly.The tightening countries, France and Belgium, had largereserve gains but presumably more at the expense of otherEuropean countries than of the United States.In the absence of material changes in the worldeconomic situation, of which no signs are as yet visible,the future course of the U. S. payments balance will dependmainly upon future policy actions of the new U. S. administra-tion and the market reactions to them. The decisive questionobviously concerns possible departures of the new admin-istration's policies from those of the Kennedy administration.President Kennedy's policy line on international financemay be understood as a system of very gradual moves, aimingas much as possible toward economic expansion rather thanrestriction.Thus, on non-Government current account, curtailmentof imports was avoided and stress was laid on expansion ofexports, not only through the traditional and not veryeffective methods of export promotion but also in two morebasic ways. First, the administration supported themaintenance of conditions conducive to wage and pricestability by exerting moral suasion on labor to avoid wagecost increases and on business to avoid price increases.President Kennedy's interventions in the railroad dispute thisyear and in the steel price move last year were the mostconspicuous instances.Second, the insistence on trade liberalization, expressedin the Trade Agreements Act and the forthcoming "Kennedyround" of tariff negotiations, was designed to improve theU. S. trade balance. Since U. S. exports greatly exceedU. S.. imports, an equal percentage increase in both exportsand imports would significantly raise our export surplus.On Government account, stress was laid on avoidingreductions in total expenditures for military and economicaid--with rather minor exceptions for some defense outlaysoverseas. Instead, spending was deflected from foreign to-19- 12/3/63domestic recipients, thus simultaneously improving thepayments balance and stimulating domestic production. Thisis the rationale of the increased preference for domesticsuppliers of goods and services for the armed forces abroad,of the agreements for countervailing foreign purchases ofU. S. armaments, and of the comprehensive tying of economicaid to exports of U. S. goods and services.Finally, on non-Government capital account, the admin-istration avoided direct capital controls and instead proposedto curb long-term outflows through the interest equalizationtax. The tax would tend to make domestic placement of fundsrelatively more attractive than placement abroad, thus againcombining the two goals of international and domestic policy.The proposed tax cut was also expected to make domesticinvestment more attractive and in this way help to offsetthe deterioration on current account usually accompanying afaster rate of economic expansion. The most recent effortsat direct promotion of foreign investment in this countryare designed to serve the same purpose.The only nonexpansionary measure, the modest raising ofshort-term rates through debt management support of FederalReserve actions, was so designed as to avoid any seriousrestrictive effect by minimizing as far as possible a risein long-term rates or any reduction in the over-all avail-ability of money and credit.How far can the new administration be expected to followthose same lines? The first public messages of PresidentJohnson reveal firm determination to abide by the principlesthat guided President Kennedy. This will exclude any radicalinnovation, such as explicit or implicit devaluation by meansof changes in the dollar-gold relation or in the system offixed par values, or any establishment of exchange controlsor other direct restrictions on current or capital transac-tions.But the new administration seems to put greater emphasison curbing Government expenditures. It may therefore alsotake a firmer line on Government expenditures abroad, withoutabandoning either the defense of Europe and Asia, or theprinciple of international assistance to developing nations.Moreover, the new administration perhaps enjoys more goodwillwith leaders of American business, and may therefore be betterable to use its influence against price increases.Labor, on the other hand, will perhaps be more criticalof efforts to intervene in wage disputes, and the risk ofcrippling strikes may slightly increase.-20- 12/3/63Foreign governments and markets apparently are reserv-ing judgment. But if the new administration can hold thecost and price line at home, persuade the Congress to passthe income tax cut and the interest equalization tax, andreduce Government expenditures abroad--then foreigners willcertainly continue their collaboration, limited as alwaysby the real or imagined interests of their own countries.In this situation, the relations of the Federal Reservewith foreign central banks are likely to be particularlyimportant. The world knows that the management and thepolicies of the Federal Reserve will not suffer fromdiscontinuity, whatever may happen in the Executive and theLegislative Branch. This assurance should serve to mini-mize difficulties in money and capital markets as well asin the attitudes and policies of foreign monetary authori-ties--as effectively as it did in November.Chairman Martin then called for the usual go-around of commentsand views on economic conditions and monetary policy beginning withMr. Hayes, who presented the following statement:Before trying to summarize my impressions of the cur-rent business and credit situation, I would emphasize thatnone of us can foresee all the consequences of PresidentKennedy's tragic death, and we would therefore do well, Ithink, to reserve judgment in some degree and await theunfolding of events. However, I do believe we can findmuch satisfaction in the calm and wisdom that seem to havecharacterized the political transition to date and in thewidespread evidence of continuing optimism on the part ofboth businessmen and consumers. Also, we appear to havegotten by with a minimum of disturbance to the dollar'sposition abroad, thanks in part to prompt action on thisside to enlist the aid of the principal foreign centralbanks and to their swift and wholehearted cooperation inholding rates firm.Subject to the general reservation already mentioned,business prospects for the immediate months ahead continueto look strong. The more complete statistics now availablefor October bear out previous impressions of a distinctpick-up, with good gains in industrial production, employ-ment, personal income, retail sales, new orders for durablegoods and housing starts. Fragmentary data suggest that the-21- 12/3/63improvement was maintained in November. Expectations ofgood gains in business spending on plant and equipmentare supported not only by the latest figures on capitalappropriations but also by increasingly frequent commentsby businessmen to the effect that practical capacity opera-tion is being attained in a growing number of lines. Theprobability of passage of the tax bill at a relatively earlydate appears to have been enhanced, if anything, by thechange in the Presidency.It is clear that we are not yet out of the woods withrespect to the balance of payments problem,, despite thesharp iprovement of the third quarter. November seemslikely to show an uncomfortably large deficit, somewhatabove that of October, with both months having been affectedadversely by window-dressing activities of the Canadian banks.It is also possible that some of the term loan commitmentsreported this summer and fall are reflected in larger capitaloutflows in recent weeks. Since our last meeting, we havehad further evidence, in the form of a discount rate increaseby the Bank of France, that the serious inflationary trend inmajor European countries can be expected to bring creditrestrictions despite these countries' desire not to invite aninflow of capital, particularly from the United States. Weshould also have in mind that the Federal Reserve is now a netuser of.the swaps to the extent of somewhat more than $300million, and it would be well to try to recoup a good portionof this in preparation for future crises.Coming to the credit situation, I was struck at our lastmeeting by the wide divergence between two schools of thoughtas to the significance of credit data of the past year or so.Whereas some members of the Committee and staff feared thatthe recert growth of total reserves has been inadequate andthat the banks are coming under excessive pressure as risingloan demands have forced them to dispose of investments, othermembers pointed to evidence that total bank credit has kept ongrowing at a surprisingly rapid pace despite our various movestoward less ease, that banks are still looking avidly forloans, ard that over-all nonbank liquidity has risen rapidlywithout interruption.I have taken a closer look than usual at the availablecredit statistics to try to assess these wide differences ininterpretation. It seems to me that the case for inadequatetotal reserve growth has hinged too much on the data for asingle mcnth--October--when total bank credit did show only-22- 12/3/63weak expansion, partly reflecting the timing of priorTreasury financings and possibly also a sharp drop inTreasury deposits. A much stronger showing would havebeen made if reserve growth through September had beenconsidered, and partial data for November suggest astrong pick-up in credit expansion last month. Thus thecase for a recent slowdown in bank credit growth cannotyet be considered as established, though it is possiblethat a slowdown is in the making--as might in fact bereasonably expected after successive System moves towardlesser case.It is also not clear whether the large excess inseasonally adjusted required reserves against privatedeposits above the Board's guideline curing November canbe regarded as an indication of quickening bank creditgrowth. In part, at least, it would seem to reflect anunusually sharp rise in reserves required against demandrather than time deposits. This could be an indicationof a continuing shift in emphasis toward demand depositsthat can occur as the economy gains momentum and that wouldimply larger reserve needs even if the rate of bank creditgrowth were to remain constant or to slow down somewhat.The data do undoubtedly support the view that the com-position of bank credit growth is changing, with increasedbusiness lending being accompanied by some net liquidationof governments, and perhaps by a somewhat reduced rate ofpurchase of municipals. As for bank liquidity positions,banks outside of New York appear to have suffered greaterimpairment of liquidity in the past year than have the NewYork City banks. Certainly the New York banks are stillactively seeking loans both here and abroad. Money supplyand total nonbank liquidity have grown more rapidly this yearthan last year--although the expected increase in Treasurydeposits before the year-end may tend to dampen this trend.The implications of all this for policy are not whollyclear. It would seem, however, that the focus of policyshould be primarily on the effects of reserve changes asmanifested in credit flows, credit market conditions andover-all liquidity rather than in recent changes in the rateof reserve growth. Cumulative bank credit expansion in thisupswing has been far greater than that over correspondingperiods of earlier business expansion. On the other hand,-23- 12/3/63we cannot judge the appropriateness of the rate of bankcredit expansion solely in terms of past cyclical patterns;it must be assessed in the light of the strength and natureof the business expansion and the over-all credit andliquidity requirements of an economy moving toward fullerresource utilization. The change in composition of bankcredit growth in recent months seems to me quite normal asthe economy gains momentum. There is, however, some groundfor caution in the fact that this gathering momentum couldbring a rather substantial switch from time to demand deposits,with consequent pressure on credit markets and on the banks'willingness to lend and invest.I am forced to conclude that we can better than everafford to place major emphasis on the over-all feel of thecredit and money markets and on measures of total creditexpansion, and less emphasis on actual rates of reservegrowth For the immediate future it would seem well tomaintain a steady policy while cbservi.ng developments bothat home and in our international payments. This would meankeeping the Federal funds rate steadily at 3-1/2 per centand encouraging a 3-month bill rate close to the discountrate, with variations on either side. At this time ofseasonal pressures, it might range as high as 3.60 per cent.The discount rate should not be changed, and I should thinkwe could continue the directive as modified at our recenttelephone meeting. I do think it not unlikely, however,that we shall sooner or later be forced by a continuingbalance of payments problem, against a background of animproving domestic economy, to take further steps in thedirection of greater credit restriction.Mr. Ellis said that New England marufacturing output andemployment continued a sidewise movement. The index of manufacturingoutput was up only 1 point in a year-to-year comparison. In the pastyear only one of the five major components of the index had showedany real growth--transportation equipment, which was up 7 per cent.This increase was largely offset in the total index by declines inother components. Total employment remained about unchanged, whilemanufacturing employment showed further weakness, being 2.5 per cent-24- 12/3/63below a year earlier in October. Advance plans in October for newheavy construction were higher than a year ago. Cumulative startsfor the first 10 months of the year showed a 9 per cent gain over ayear ago, compared with a 3 per cent gain nationally.In contrast to the United States pattern, Mr. Ellis continued,business loan demand in New England had risen less than seasonally inthe past 2 months. There was a greater than seasonal spurt in demanddeposits in November. District weekly reporting banks were on theselling side of the Federal funds market. The shifting to municipalshad been at least temporarily reversed.The change in the Administration appeared to have resulted ingenerally improved business expectations, Mr. Ellis said, with afeeling that the political climate wculd be more favorable to business.He thought that labor might press its demands more strongly than underthe previous Administration, and that prices would firm.Turning to monetary policy, Mr. Ellis observed that 10 daysearlier there had been widespread confidence that business trendswould be strongly up during the next 6 months. Business loans atbanks and the money supply were expanding sharply, prices were firm,and business orders rising. The President's assassination causedeveryone to review the situation again and to attempt to assess theeconomic significance of the tragedy. Mr. Ellis was inclined to agreethat the business outlook had improved. Nevertheless, he thought it-25- 12/3/63 -26-would be improper to make any change in monetary policy at thismeeting, particularly since the next meeting was only two weeks away,and since there would be heavy seasonal needs for reserves beforeChristmas. It seemed easier to conclude that there should be nochange in policy, Mr. Ellis continued, than to specify just whatthat conclusion implied. He advocated a "seasonally adjusted andcyclically adjusted no change." If market demands tended to push upinterest rates in a customary seasonal rise, rates should be free toreflect these demands. To him, "no change" did not mean that FederalReserve credit would be supplied in unlimited amounts to hold ratesat present levels if strong and increasing demands by borrowersmaterialized.As targets, Mr. Ellis said, he would suggest net free reservesbelow $100 million, Federal funds consistently at 3-1/2 per cent, andthe 90-day bill rate fluctuating above or below the discount rate. Hewould suggest no change in the discount rate at present, but he observedthat the French action in raising their discount rate shortly after thelast meeting of the Committee indicated their determination to usemonetary policy in fighting inflation.With respect to the directive, Mr. Ellis said that he wouldbe inclined to delete the reference in the second paragraph to"cushioning any unsettlement that might arise in money markets stemmingfrom the death of President Kennedy." He proposed including in the 12/3/63 -27-first paragraph a reference to the uncertainties resulting from thechange in the Administration, because, as Mr. Noyes had indicated,this was an event of great economic significance.Mr. Irons said that during October conditions in the EleventhDistrict were steady at a very high level, and the indications forthe first two weeks of November were for continued economic strength.Data for the last part of November undoubtedly would show some slacken-ing of activity in retail trade, industry, and other sectors as aresult of the cessation of business for several days following thePresident's assassination. There were signs of a recent pick-up inretail trade, however, if one could judge by the crowds and parkingproblems in shopping centers. There seemed to be a beginning ofinterest in Christmas shopping. Automobile registrations were at arecord high, and construction was very strong. Agricultural conditionshad been improved by recent rains. On the whole, there was little newto repcrt; it would be necessary to observe developments during thenext four or five weeks.Mr. Irons commented that loans, investments, and deposits atDistrict banks recently were all up in fairly sizable amounts. Theincrease in bank loans was general among types of loans, and the risein investments was mainly in holdings of Government securities. Timedeposits also were up, but not so much as a year ago. Several Districtbanks had been active buyers of Federal funds, Mr. Irons continued, and 12/3/63 -28-compared with the period 3 weeks earlier, District banks were borrow-ing more from the Federal Reserve Bank; they were swinging frommoderate-to-low borrowing to substantial borrowing. There had beenan increase in week-end borrowing, particularly by large city banks,who were coming in on Friday afternoon and going out on the followingMonday or Tuesday, and this pushed the average borrowing figures up.Nationally, Mr. Irons said, the economic picture was strong.Activity was not surging but the situation was probably healthierthan if it were. He thought this was not a time to make any changein policy. He saw no strong reasons for a policy change, even apartfrom the recent tragedy. Interest rate relationships seemed reason-ably satisfactory. He thought that seasonal requirements for reservesshould be met, but reserves should not be provided to excess. Someincrease in discounting might occur.This was a period, Mr. Irons said, during which the Deskshould give particular attention to the feel of the market. He hadin min' pretty much the same statistical limits as Mr. Ellis hadmentioned--free reserves in the zero to $100 million range, the billrate moving around 3-1/2 per cent but not too far above or below thelevel, and the Federal funds rate at 3-1/2 per cent. He would notchange the discount rate at this time. As to the directive, he didnot think any change was necessary unless the Committee wanted to takeout the reference to President Kennedy's death. He would be reluctant 12/3/63to put in a clause referring to the change in Administration such asMr. Ellis had suggested. The Committee might keep this in mind buthe thought there was no place for it in the directive.Mr. Swan said that economic activity in the Twelfth Districtcontinued to rise in October and presumably also in early November.As in the nation, there seemed to be no marked indications to datethat reassessments of the last two weeks were likely to check thepossibility of further gains. Total emplcyment had increased inOctober, and for a change the increase was greater than that in laborforce; the unemployment rate, seasonally adjusted, had declined by0.1 per cent. Developments with respect to construction activity inOctober were mixed, with housing starts rising but constructionemployment down for the second month in a row. District manufacturingshowed gains in October and seemed to have continued at a good pacein the first part of November.With respect to banking developments, Mr. Swan reported thatTwelfth District banks had shared in the rather large rise in loansthat occurred in other parts of the country. Through November 20,weekly reporting banks showed a substantial loan increase, half ofwhich was in business loans. Demand deposits had risen but time de-posits declined primarily because of Christmas club payments. Therewas some indication of a slightly tighter reserve position, but nosubstantial change.-29- 12/3/63 -30-With respect to policy, Mr. Swan said he concurred in the viewalready expressed that the Committee would not want to make any changeat this time. He thought it was still necessary for the Committee todo what it could to see that the confidence reflected in the currentsituation was not affected adversely. The Committee would meet againin two weeks, and could assess the situation then.Mr. Swan added that he also felt there was some problem indefining "no change." He thought the Committee would want to takecare of seasonal demands between now and Christmas. But if seasonalfactor were expected to have an effect in the market and no effortwere made to offset them, this would amount to a change in policy.He preferred to avoid this course if possible. He also would want toavoid any possibility of inferences by the market of a shift to atighter policy. While the bill rate might well fluctuate around thediscount rate, Mr. Swan said, he would hope that it would not be abovethe discount rate for any sustained period of time. He would notchange The directive. He agreed with Mr. Irons that the suggestedchange in the first paragraph was inappropriate, and preferred toretain the clause that had been inserted in the second paragraphrelating to the President's death.Mr. Deming said that in the business survey taken by theMinneapolis Bank in late November, mostly just before PresidentKennedy's death, there was little appreciable change in sentiment 12/3/63 -31-from earlier surveys this year dating back some months. Approximtelytwo-thirds felt that business activity would continue to move aheadmoderately in the weeks immediately ahead. However, a few reportersfrom the rural areas expressed some concern with lower cattle pricesand their impact on farm incomes.Personal incomes in the Ninth District were relatively strongin October, up from September and above October a year ago in aboutthe same proportions as national figures. Bank debits continued torun substantially higher than a year ago. Construction activity wasstrong, and this seemed to be true also of over-all retail sales.District department store people were optimistic about prospective,Christmas ss.les and brisk activity in car and farm machinery salesaround the District had been reported to the Bank in recent weeks.In general, Mr. Deming said, he would characterize the busi-ness trend in the Ninth District as roughly paralleling that of thenation--expansion with prospects for continued improvement in theweeks ahead.In District banking, total bank credit expansion both inOctober and in the early weeks of November was approximately in linewith the usual seasonal patterns. However, within that total, loansexpanded above the usual seasonal pattern while investments were notquite so strong as usual. A major portion of the total loan advancewas in commercial and industrial loans. 12/3/63 -32-Mr. Deming said he agreed with these who had suggested thatthere be no change in policy for the forthcoming two weeks; he thoughtthis was the course of wisdom in the present situation. He also agreedwith Mr. Irons with respect to the directive. He did not think itpropez to insert a reference in the first paragraph to the change inAdministration, and he thought the phrasing of the second paragraphwas appropriate for implementing a policy of no change. He concurredin the guidelines Mr. Ellis had laid down, with this amendment: hewould like to see the bill rate fluctuating around the 3-1/2 per centdiscount rate, but not too far. He thought 3.60 might be too far onthe upside.Mr. Scanlon reported that economic activity in the SeventhDistrict was continuing the gradual improvement he had reported atrecent meetings. Confidence and moderate optimism were widespread andappeared to have been affected only nomentarily by the assassinationof President Kennedy and the transfer of executive responsibilitiesto President Johnson.Capital expenditures were expected by midwest manufacturersof producers' durable goods to exceed the McGraw-Hill estimate of a4 per cent rise for 1964. For example, the decline indicated by thesurvey for railroad equipment contrasted with an appreciable increaseexpected by industry sources. 12/3/63 -33-Total credit at weekly reporting banks in the Seventh Districtrose strongly in the first three weeks of November with both loans andinvestments participating in the rise. Business loans had continued torise faster than in corresponding periods of other recent years.On policy, Mr. Scanlon said he believed it was desirable to doeverything possible to maintain an atmosphere of stability in the moneymarkets in the next few weeks. To him, th.is would mean providing formeeting seasonal pressures. Like Mr. Irons and others, he would recom-mend no change in the directive and would not favor changing the dis-count rate.Mr. Clay said that following a Governmental transition suchas this country had experienced recently there would appear to beconsiderable merit in maintaining the general monetary posture un-changed unless circumstances dictated otherwise. In his opinion thisview had merit despite the fact that the changeover had been made ina very orderly manner and there was no evidence that the course ofeconomic and financial events had been altered.Reviewing other considerations, Mr. Clay said, there seemedto be no compelling reason to change policy at this time. When theCommittee last met developments in the credit markets were a matterof some concern, as interest rates had moved to a markedly higherlevel in the short-term area with upward pressure on interest ratesthroughout the maturity structure. However, subsequent developmentsaltered that situation and interest rates receded somewhat. 12/3/63 -34-Thinking in terms of those later credit market developmentsrather than those existing at the time of the last meeting, Mr. Claysaid, policy for the period ahead might appropriately continue essen-tially unchanged. Weighing the various factors in the internationalsituation, present policy seemed satisfactory--with any injection ofrestraint and upward pressure on interest rates to be avoided. Sus-taining economic growth in this country continued to require theassistance of public policy. In keeping with this view, the domesticsituation also called for an avoidance of any reduction of reserveavailability and upward pressure on interest rates. Rather, memberbank reserves should be provided in sufficient volume to permit com-mercial bank credit to expand on a seasonally adjusted basis. Sofar as the 90-day Treasury bill rate was concerned, Mr. Clay said,it would be well to think of 3-1/2 per cent as about the upper endof the yield range. No change should be made in the discount rate,and the economic policy directive might appropriately be left in itspresent form,Mr. Wayne reported that Fifth District business continued toexpand, with October statistics quite good. All categories of non-farm employment except services advanced as did most categories offactory man-hours. Gains were particularly strong in textiles,apparel, transportation equipment, and primary metals. Bank debitsremained close to September's record level, and coal production rose 12/3/63 -35-to the best levels of the year. Building permits slipped below theSeptember all-time high but remained higher than in any other month.Current clues, Mr. Wayne said, suggested that November showed asimilar rise. Department store sales rebounded after sagging inOctober, and rates of insured unemployment remained low. Respondentsin the Reserve Bank's opinion survey displayed renewed optimism. Onbalance, they reported further gains in nfw orders, backlogs, ship-ments, wages, and prices but no rise in employment or hours. Con-struction firms were said to be working at or near capacity withwages and material prices tending upward. Flue-cured tobacco saleswere still 9 per cent below last year's levels.Mr. Wayne observed that since the present period of businessexpansion started in February 1961 the American economy had passedthrough five major periods of crisis. These were the abortive Cubaninvasion, the building of the Berlin Wall, the stock market debacleof May 1962, the Cuban missile crisis, and now the death of thePresident. The fact that the economy surmounted these crises withoutpanic, without any major emergency measures, and with little apparenteffect on business activity could be taken as evidence of substantialbasic strength and equilibrium. The final economic reaction to thelatest crisis was, of course, yet to develop but the initial reactionof the financial markets tended to be reassuring. 12/3/63Before the events of November 22 the business picture wasdistinctly encouraging, Mr. Wayne continued. The increases in machinetool orders, housing starts, production and sale of automobiles, andpersonal income in October were outstanding. Lesser but significantadvances were shown by orders for durable goods, industrial production,and total retail sales. With comparative stability in employment andunemployment in October and no major development of an unfavorablenature in October or the early part of November, Mr. Wayne said, thisall added up to a picture of considerable business strength withmoderate growth. If recent events did not cause any significant changein the trends, which seemed to be the best guess at present, then theoutlook was for continuing strength and some improvement in the nearfuture.Mr. Wayne commented that the Commttee's current policy andoperating organization and procedures had been severely tested in thepast two weeks, and all of them had come through the crisis with ahighly creditable record. In his judgment the System could appropri-ately derive a modest but deep sense of accomplishment from this per-formance. In particular, Mr. Wayne said, the domestic and foreignDesks were to be commended for their alertness and their preparationfor all eventualities. Before the crisis it had seemed to him thatthe Committee's policy was an appropriate one in view of the circum-stances. The crisis apparently had caused no significant change in-36- 12/3/63 -37-basic conditions, although such a change could develop later. In themeantime, any substantial change in monetary policy would be prematureand could be misinterpreted, coming so early in the new Administrationwithout any obvious justification. Also, the Committee would meetagain in two weeks instead of the usual three and would then have alittle better perspective on recent events. For these reasons, Mr.Wayne said, he would favor a continuation of recent policy, meaningby that the policy pursued week before last rather than last week. Hebelieved, however, that in the current directive the Committee shouldcontinue the authority to the Desk to take appropriate action tocushion any nsettlement which might arise from the recent crisis,as was given in last week's special directive. Mr. Wayne thought nochange in the discount rate seemed appropriate under present circum-stances.Mr. Mills said that in his opinion the purely seasonalexpansionary developments in the supply of reserves and in bankcredit that were now being experienced must be viewed in their truecharacter as superficial and temporary, and they should not be per-mitted to obscure more basic factors. In his judgment, Mr. Millssaid, a correct appraisal of these factors called for a lessrestrictive credit policy. 12/3/63Mr. Mills then presented the following statement:The change in the Administration of the Federal Govern-ment is in itself a good reason for relaxing the cumulativefinancial pressures resulting from a restrictive FederalReserve System credit policy and for relieving at the sametime the inevitable financial tensions that accompanied thistragic episode in our history. However, the rationale arguingfor an easier policy goes beyond any connection with theassassination of President Kennedy and was outlined to thisCommittee in the comments I submitted both at its last regularmeeting and at the special "telephone" meeting.The reported understanding reached with foreign officialsand governments that countervailing interest rate actions willnot be taken to lift their domestic levels of interest ratessignificantly above those now prevailing in the United States,gives tacit assurance that the current objective of FederalReserve System policy-making to mount an interest rate offen-sive against an outflow of gold and dollars can be modified.Accordingly, long past due attention can now be paid todomestic economic considerations without serious possibilitythat a more liberal provision of reserves to the commercialbanking system will produce unwanted balance of payments re-percussions in the field of competitive international interestrates.Under all of these circumstances, it is desirable to in.-crease the supply of reserves at the disposal of the commercialbanking system so as to expand the aailability of credit and,it so doing, also give a psychological stimulus to the financialcommunity at a critical time. If the adoption of an easiercredit policy should impair the efforts that have been made tostrengthen the nation's adverse balance of payments defenses,I reiterate my previous statements to the Committee that re-course should be made to the imposition of selective controlsover short- and long-term capital movements out of the UnitedStates, and that the Federal Reserve System should no longerbe compelled to serve as the chosen policy instrument to combatour balance of payments difficulties in the various financialareas in which it has been operating to that end.Speaking on the subject of controls, official aversion tothe use of selective controls over capital movements abroad hasbeen evinced as being contrary to the principle of a free capitalmarket in the United States. Instead, an artificial interestrate structure has been constructed, ostensibly to help preservethat principle--all under the auspices of Federal Reserve System-38- 12/3/63and U. S. Treasury policy-making officials. In my opinion,a hard-handed control over interest rates and the U. S.Government securities market, is a far more reprehensibleform of official financial control than the use of selectivecontrols over outward capital movements because it strikes ablow at the very heart of a free financial market. I pleadonce again for a policy return to free market principles inthe formulation and conduct of Federal Reserve System monetaryand credit policy, which policy should include the resurrectionof the 'bills only" policy of yesteryear.Mr. Robertson made the following statement:I have been deeply gratified by the way in which finan-cial markets, both at home and abroad, have come through thetragic shock of the President's assassination. I appreciatethat some part of that response is a credit to the well-timedaction of the Committee's operating officers, and I shouldlike to add my own note of commendation to them.More broadly, I have been quite satisfied with finan-cial developments throughout the three weeks since our lastmeeting. It seems to me there has been a little less tensionevident in the money market, and I think that is as it shouldbe. I think our own actions to supply reserves in timelyfashion have been a constructive force here--along with theTreasury action to reduce pressure on the bill rate by cuttingtwo bill auctions and permitting payment by 50 per cent taxand loan account credit for a third.Recent bank loan expansion strikes me as an encouragingsign--particularly so since it has been accompanied by an im-provement in general business indicators, by a persisting roughstability in wholesale and commodity price indexes, and by re-cent balance of payments figures that suggest we may be continu-ing, on a net basis, the sharply improved performance reportedfor the third quarter.In these circumstances I would favor supplying sufficientreserves over the next two weeks to accommodate whatever maymaterialize in the way of private demands for money and bankloans. I think this is a particularly good rule to follow inthe next two or three weeks of climactic seasonal pressures,for the exact dimensions of such demands cannot be forecastprecisely, and we only create needless disruption of financialprocesses if we instigate counter pressures against what turnout to be purely temporary or seasonal bulges in market demands.-39- 12/3/63 -40-I would remind the Committee that both last year andthe year before we acted at the last meeting of the year totighten policy in the face of what appeared to be an up-swing in credit demand, only to see the upswing abate afterthe turn of the year. This time we should wait, to be surea similar pattern is not ahead of us this year, before try-ing to adapt our policy to what we assume 1964 will bring.The policy I have in mind would not call for any changein the committee directive, apart from dropping the phrase-ology concerning President Kennedy's death that was adoptedat the special telephone meeting last week.Mr. Shepardson said that the general economic outlook seemedto him to be encouraging. The change in Government after the tragedyhad been accomplished with unusual calm. At this season of the yearthe Committee would expect to supply needed seasonal reserves, andhe thought that could be accomplished with existing policy.As to the directive, Mr. Shepardscn said that the phrase re-garding the death of President Kennedy conceivably could be eliminated.On the other hand, only a short time had elapsed and with another meet-ing scheduled in two weeks he thought the Committee might leave thedirective as it was. He concurred in the guidelines suggested byMr. Ellis.Mr. Mitchell said he agreed that this was not a time for theCommittee to make a change in its policy. However, the question waswhether this implied no change in bill rates or in bank reserves.The Treasury's monetary policy appeared to be aimed at a bill ratepeg, and this evidently was what the market expected the Committee'spolicy to be. While he did not think the Committee's policy had tobe the same as the Treasury's, it would be helpful if it were. 12/3/63 -41-Mr. Mitchell said he did not care much for the peg and he wouldbe happy to join with those people at the table who were prepared to letthe bill rate fluctuate, if they would take the same position in Januarywhen the bil. rate would be tending downward. This would be the mostwholesome position for the Committee to adopt, Mr. Mitchell said, buthe was practical enough to realize that the Committee could not get toofar away from the Treasury's policy.Mr. Mitchell said he had a feeling of apprehension about theprojected role of monetary policy. It seemed to him that everyoneagreed that it would be all right to cut taxes to achieve fullerresource utilization, but there were quite a few people who thoughtit improper to use monetary policy to this end. Some members of theCommittee seemed ready to move towards credit restraint as soon asthere was evidence of growth, long before a satisfactory rate ofresource utilization had been achieved. In Mr. Mitchell's judgmentthe economy was not ready for a policy of restraint, and the Committeeshould not use monetary policy to prevent the economy from achievingthe goal set for fiscal policy unless there was very strong reasonfor doing so.Mr. Hickman said his thought was that the tragedy of November22 had not changed the economic outlook significantly, either domes-tically or internationally. However, the reaction of consumers andbusinessmen had been such that economic developments in November would 12/3/63 -42-be more difficult than usual to measure and appraise. The unusualholiday and some part-time operations immediately following the eventwere likely to produce widely varying effects on statistical series,depending upon the way in which the particular series was adjusted forworking days. It would, therefore, be difficult for the Committee tointerpret information on current developments until well after theturn of the year.For this reason, Mr. Hickman said, it was all the more impor-tant for the Committee to turn back to the situation as it was revealedin the data through mid-November. On the basis of that evidence, thepresent configuration of business was such that the main danger--tothe extent that there was one--stemmed not from feebleness of demandbut from developing exuberance. The flow of business news showedclearly that one after another of the areas of doubt or weakness hadsimply melted away.A good illustration was provided by manufacturers' new orders,Mr. Hickman said. The preliminary report for October for durablegoods showed further advance to the level of last April's position,prior to the steel retrenchment. Current orders for machine toolswere especially strong, particularly for cutting tools, which is themajor component of this series. New orders of steel producers report-ing directly to the Cleveland Federal Reserve Bank on a confidentialbasis were more robust than had been anticipated just three weeks ago. 12/3/63Construction activity and housing starts provided additionalevidence of strength. Housing starts in October were up 8 per centfrom September and 22 per cent from a year ago, an impressive showingdespite the well-known volatility of this series. Retail sales pro-vided still another instance of unusual strength. Despite the un-certainties of early Fall and the poor showing of department storesales in October, the October figures for total retail sales reacheda new record, and reports for November prior to the national tragedywere especially strong. Even the Fourth District problem industry,bituminous coal, had shown signs of increased activity in recentmonths. Reports on corporate profits for both the second and thirdquarters were considerably stronger than in other recent calendarquarters. Soft spots in the economy were almost impossible to findalthough high unemployment remained an unsolved problem.In view of the solidity of the business expansion a tax cutenactment could conceivably produce a reinforced stimulus, Mr. Hickmansaid, which in turn could provide a serious problem of short-termbalance. Such a possibility was by no means so remote as it seemeda short time ago.Mr. Hickman felt that because of the upward thrust of theeconomy and the uncertainties of statistical measures monetary policywould be most difficult to formulate over the next two months.Clearly, no change was indicated at the mcment. he said, but the-43- 12/3/63Comittee should be continuously alert to the possibility of movingfrom its present position to one of outright restraint. For the nexttwo weeks, Mr. Hickman continued, he would like to see the Federalfunds rate at 3-1/2 per cent all of the time, and the bill rate atthe same level or slightly higher. He would prefer to achieve thebill rate objective by a lower level of free reserves than had obtainedsince the last meeting rather than by Treasury intervention in themoney market and Desk operations in the bond market. To achieve this,he judged that it might be necessary to allow free reserves to gobelow $50 million, which would not be undesirable in view of generalbusiness and bank loan demand. The System should feel gratifiedabout the manner in which the recent potential crisis was handled bythose responsible for the management of its domestic and foreignaccounts, he concluded.Mr. Bopp said that labor force measures for the ThirdDistrict recently had been performing somewhat better than otherindicators of economic activity. Labor demand appeared to be hold-ing at fairly satisfactory levels, but manufacturing output andemployment were not and sales at department stores were lagging badly.Continuing tightness characterized Third District banking.The basic reserve deficit of reserve city banks set a new recent-yearrecord; and in the week of November 20 borrowing by reserve city banksreached the highest level of 1962 or 1963. Country bank borrowingsince the last Committee meeting also had been on an uptrend.-44- 12/3/63 -45-For the next three weeks, Mr. Bopp continued, policy shouldbe directed toward maintaining a tone of .teadiness and stabilityin the money and credit markets and in the foreign exchange market.The transition to a new Administration seemed to have been madesmoothly but had naturally resulted in some uncertainties as to futuretrends. He would supply reserves as necessary to meet seasonal demandand to avoid any reduction in the availability of bank credit. Hewould suggest no change in the discount rate, and no change in thedirective except to delete the reference to the death of PresidentKennedy.Mr. Patterson reported that there apparently had been no let-down in the economic expansion nor in the growth of bank credit thathad been characteristic of the Sixth District during the precedingmonths of 1953. So far, there was little, if any, evidence that theevents connected with the President's assassination had altered theexisting economic trends.Personal income for the firs' three quarters of 1963 in eachof the Sixth District States had increased at a greater rate from 1962than that of the nation as a whole, according to estimates made by theAtlanta Bank's Research Department. The final income figures for theyear probably would show an even higher rate of increase for the year1963 than the 7.4 per cent increase for the first three quarters in1963 partly because of the especially favorable farm situation. In 12/3/63 -46-October and ovember, cotton harvests were exceptionally large andcurrently large harvests of corn, soybeans, and sugar cane were beingmarketed at favorable prices. Manufacturing activity also continuedto expand.About the only factor offsetting these elements of incomegrowth had been a weakening in construction employment in certainparts of the District. In Mississippi, construction employment hadbeen falling for the past 6 months largely because of the completionof a large oil refinery at Pascagoula whose construction had utilizedapproximately 3,000 construction workers for about 2 years. Althoughproduction at the refinery, with a capacity to utilize 100,000 barrelsof crude oil per day from offshore Louisiana wells, began in October,only 330 workers would be regularly employed. Construction employmentalso was weak in Florida, but there were increases in Louisiana andTennessee.Against this background of expanding income, Mr. Pattersonsaid, consumer spending had been strong. Automobile sales had beenat a record high, and this had been reflected in an expansion ofconsumer instalment credit.Bank credit, according to preliminary estimates, increasedmore than seasonally through the first three weeks of November. Totaldeposits also expanded correspondingly, although most of the depositincrease was concentrated in demand deposits. Business loans at theweekly reporting banks in leading cities increased substantially. 12/3/63 -47-Demand for nonbank credit also continued to be large. Forexample, well over $120 million in municipal securities were sold byState and local governmental units during October. The major partof the securities were to finance public housing--45 per cent--andfor highway construction--25 per cent.In an effort to determine the response of consumers and busi-nessmen to the upsetting events of the preceding week, the Bank'sResearch Department staff had made a spot survey late last week.The responses indicated that there was little immediate effect thatcould be discerned, but that uncertainty had been introduced intothe current economic and financial scene.Department stores had, of course, experienced slow salesover the week-end and automobile dealers had been adversely affected.Sales, however, had rebounded by Tuesday or Wednesday. Bankersreported that business was being carried on as usual; loans in pro-cess Friday appeared to be going through, and there were no signifi-cant changes in deposit withdrawals that could be related to thetragedy. Mortgage bankers and savings and loan officials reportedno cancellation of mortgage plans, nor increased withdrawals.Security dealers and brokers reported that the disturbances in thesecurities market that started Friday seemed to be a signal for agreater number of persons to try to enter the market when the ex-changes were opened on Tuesday. 12/3/63The respondents, Mr. Patterson said, emphasized that validassessment of the long-run effects could rot be made now. However,some of them believed that long-run spending plans and credit demandswould be affected in the future. Their inability to specify justwhat these effects would be or how they would materialize suggestedthat the uneasiness that existed could be dispelled fairly quicklyif economic conditions continued to be "normal." On the other hand,the replies suggested that there might develop a tendency to relatefuture unfavorable economic developments to the assassination andthe subsequent events even when such relationship did not exist.Mr. Shuford said that while the expansion in business activityin the Eighth District had moderated this fall, the District hadexperienced a substantial improvement over the year as a whole. Bankdebits had continued to rise since mid-summer, but employment andindustrial use of electric power had changed little.Business loans at weekly reporting banks in the District hadrisen 8 per cent more than seasonally since mid-year, Mr. Shufordobserved. The largest net borrowers had been food processors andcommodity dealers seeking funds to finance the marketing and process-ing of the large crops this year. Despite strong credit demands,member bank reserve positions had remained comfortable. Borrowingsfrom the Federal Reserve Bank had been relatively small and Districtbanks had been net sellers of Federal funds on most days.-48- 12/3/63 -49-The Eighth District agricultural situation was good, andcrops were unusually large. Recent estimates for major cropspointed to a significant increase in farm income in the last partof the year. Corn production was estimated to be up 13 per cent,soybeans 4 per cent, rice 14 per cent, tobacco 3 per cent, and cotton13 per cent. The marketings of these crops were already having anexpansionary impact on country bank deposits in the District.With respect to policy, Mr. Shuford said he favored no changefor the reasons already mentioned by others. In view of the recentchange in the Executive Branch, he agreed that at this time the Com-mittee should maintain about the same position that had prevailed forthe last few weeks unless there was some strong reason for making achange, and he saw no such reason. He would subscribe to the viewsof Mr. Irons and others with respect to continuing to supply seasonalneeds for reserves and with respect to a short-term rate fluctuatingaround 3-1/2 per cent. While he felt a bill rate at this level wouldbe appropriate, he would not be discouraged if it went up a bit above3-1/2 per cent for a short period of time during the remainder of theyear in view of the seasonal situation. By the same reasoning, hewould not be disturbed if the bill rate declined after the turn ofthe year. Mr. Shuford favored no change in policy and no change inthe discount rate. He preferred to leave the directive as it was forthe next two weeks because he thought the Committee would have somedifficulty in trying to improve it. 12/3/63 -50-Mr. Balderston said that he would favor continuation ofcurrent policy until the next meeting and would leave the directiveunchanged. In trying to appraise the impact of the recent substantialshift of demand deposits from the Treasury to the private sector, hecontinued, he had become less disturbed about the current up-sweep inthe rate of increase of money supply growth. To avoid being misledby deposit shifts he had examined figures for the year 1963 to date.The annual rate of growth in the money supply so far this year was4 per cent, a substantial rate. But personal incomes were up over 5per cent, the industrial production index 6 per cent, and constantprice GNP 4 per cent. Thinking about the near future, he recalledthat deposit turnover had risen 7.7 per cent, and average hourlyearnings had risen 3 per cent despite the nationwide concern withkeeping our economy competitive. State and local government bondsales were up 5 per cent, and seasonally adjusted housing starts hadrisen by more than 20 per cent.Mr. Balderston observed that he had found only one weakness--a drop in net realized income of farmers for the second year in a row,this time of 5 per cent. He suggested that after the turn of the yearthe Committee would want to make a searching appraisal of what hadhappened and what was likely to happen.Chairman Martin said that he had little to add to the discus-sion. He wanted to join in commending the foreign exchange and open 12/3/63 -51-market Desks for their performance in the period just past; it seemedto him that the System had performed well, and he believed that thiswas generally recognized.Although he did not think the matter was of great importance,the Chairman continued, he personally felt that it was not necessaryto delete the phrase relating to the death of the President from thedirective, particularly since only a short time had elapsed. The Com-mittee would meet again in two weeks and that might be a good time todelete the phrase. But he had no objection to doing so at this meet-ing if that was the preference of the Committee.On the broad question of policy, the Chairman said, he hadone comment to make with respect to the apprehensions that Mr. Mitchellhad expressed, namely, that those Committee members who were talkingabout a firmer policy from time to time were not talking about restrain-ing the economy but sustaining it. There could, of course, be dis-agreement on how to achieve this objective, but the problem was oneof possibly having too much credit available at various times.The Chairman then suggested that the Committee vote on aproposal that there should be no change in policy and no change inthe directive.All members of the Committee except Mr. Mills indicated thatthey favored no change in policy for the forthcoming two weeks. 12/3/63Thereupon, upon motion duly madeand seconded, the Federal Reserve Bankof New York was authorized ar.d directed,until otherwise directed by the Committee,to execute transactions in the SystemAccount in accordance with the followingcurrent economic policy directive:It is the Federal Open Market Committee's currentpolicy to accommodate moderate growth in bank credit, whilemaintaining conditions in the money market that would con-tribute to continued improvement in the capital account ofthe U. S. balance of payments. This. policy takes into.con-sideration the fact that domestic economic activity is ex-panding further, although with a margin of underutilizedresources; and the fact that the balance of payments positionis still adverse despite a tendency to reduced deficits. Italso recognizes the increases in bank credit, money supply,and the reserve base of recent months.To implement this policy, System open market operationsshall be conducted with a view to cushioning any unsettlementthat might arise in money markets stemming from the death ofPresident Kennedy and to maintaining about the same conditionsin the money market as have prevailed in recent weeks, whileaccommodating moderate expansion in aggregate bank reserves.Votes for this action: Messrs. Martin,Hayes, Balderston, Bopp, Clay, Irons, Mitchell,Robertson, Scanlon, and Shepardson. Voteagainst this action: Mr. Mills.In connection with his favorable vote on the directive Mr.Hayes observed that he agreed with the Chairman that while the matterwas not too important it was desirable to retain the phrase relatingto the President's death since the money and securities markets werestill in quite a sensitive condition.-52- 12/3/63Mr. Mills said he had dissented both on the consensus favor-ing no policy change and on the directive for the reasons he had setforth in his comments earlier in the meeting. Reverting to theChairman's remarks about sustaining the economy, he observed that tohim this meant giving the economy sustenance by providing additionalreserves.In response to a question by the Chairman, Mr. Stone indicatedthat he did not think any change was necessary in the Committee's con-tinuing authority directive with respect to the $1 billion limitationon the change in the aggregate amount of U. S. Government securitiesheld in the System Open Market Account during any period between meet-ings of the Committee.Chairman Martin noted that a request had been received fromCongressman Patman for lists of the names of individuals who hadattended the last three meetings of the Committee. It was his viewthat this request should be complied with. He asked if there wereany objections to doing so, and no objections were expressed.Mr. Mills said that in connection with this subject he wouldlike to note that a large number of persons attended Committee meet-ings. He thought some might share his concern about such events asthe publication in Sylvia Porter's letter giving the hour and time ofthe Open Market Committee's recent telephone meeting. The Chairmanobserved that Miss Porter had also reported another Committee meeting-53- 12/3/63which had not actually been held, indicating that her information wasnot completely accurate. However, he continued, he shared Mr. Mills'concern and he believed it behooved all of those present to be verycareful about what was said outside the room.Chairman Martin then suggested that the Committee discuss pos-sible publication of its minutes for some past period. He noted thata memorandum on this subject from Messrs. Young and Sherman, datedSeptember 28, 1963, had been distributed to the Committee. He recog-nized there were a great many conflicting points of view on this matter.He would simply say at the outset that his own judgment had not changed;he felt that if the Committee could find some suitable means of re-leasing the minutes for 1951-1960 it would be a worthwhile way ofmaking public information on how the Committee operated. He realizedthat releasing these minutes could make some problems for the Committee.But the more he lived with this subject the more convinced he becamethat a great many people misunderstood the nature and the conduct ofthe Committee's meetings. Publication of the minutes would not com-pletely dispel such misunderstanding, but it would give a better basisfor understanding than was now available in published materials. Hedoubted that the minutes could get much public attention--the generalpublic probably would not be greatly interested. But he felt it wasimportant to clarify the decision-making process of the Committee. Hethought it should be made clear that consideration was given to many-54- 12/3/63 -55-factors affecting monetary policy, and that this was not a one-manoperation, but that differing views were expressed and the decisionstaken were general decisions. Making the minutes available seemed tohim the best way of giving insight into the conduct of the meetingsand into the detailed nature of the views expressed.The Chairman commented that the particular dates for whichminutes were released did not seem to be a vital matter. The 1951-1960 period he had mentioned was important in the Committee's historyand embraced the Treasury-Federal Reserve Accord. The year 1960 seemeda good terminal point; the minutes for that year had already been madeavailable to the Joint Economic Committee.Mr. Hayes said that he was reluctant to differ because hethought the Chairman had a better feel than he for the reality of thedemand for this kind of information. But the more he had thought aboutthe subject the more he had tended to feel that the Committee would dowell not to give the minutes out. He was not quite sure why this wasthe time at which the Committee should do so; nothing had happened tosuggest the desirability of now changing past policy on the matter.The Committee had given the 1960 minutes to a Congressional Committee,but it also had objected to the publication of excerpts from theseminutes. The point had been made that the public deserved more under-standing of Federal Reserve operations. He recognized the truth ofthis statement, but he was not sure that publication of the minutes 12/3/63 -56-would be the most effective way of giving the desired understanding.There were other mechanisms; more frequent statements of the natureof policy, to his mind, would be more enlightening than making theminutes publ.c. He did not think the minutes would add a great dealto what was already publicly known.If the minutes were published, Mr, Hayes continued, he thoughtit should be only with a considerable time lag. He was concerned thatif publication was once started there would be agitation for reducingthe lag and a tendency to do so. He thought there always would beadvocates for the Committee's releasing everything, including state-ments of actions on the day they were taken. But in his judgment acentral bank could not operate that way. It seemed to Mr. Hayes thatthe principles still held that Chairman Martin had outlined in hisletter to Mr. Patman of last year, in which the Chairman had explainedwhy the Committee's internal deliberations were not matters of publicconcern.There were dangers of embarrassment, Mr. Hayes said, in con-nection with the Committee's discussions of dealings with centralbanks abroad. And there was the further question of whether the pos-sibility of publication of the minutes might inhibit discussion atmeetings, although he was not too concerned on this score because hehad confidence in the integrity of the people around the table. On 12/3/63 -57-balance, unless the Committee felt there was overwhelming politicalpressure to make the minutes available, he leaned toward not publish-ing them.Chairman Martin said that he would like to emphasize thatthere had been no pressure on this subject. The question of whetherthis was an appropriate time to publish the minutes was within theCommittee's discretion; no commitments had been made.Mr. Ellis said that he agreed the Committee should give morerather than less information to scholars. He was enthusiastically infavor of making available more complete descriptions of policy, becausehe thought there was a legitimate need for such descriptions byscholars and others. At the same time, he felt that scholars shouldbe provided with a complete rationale of the use of all policy instru-ments, including discount rate and reserve requirement changes as wellas oper market operations. Because he had this objective in mind, hethought. the Committee would do itself a disservice if it released OpenMarket Committee minutes. A true scholar would be frustrated byomissions from these minutes of much of the complete policy record.Also, publication of some past minutes would place the Federal Reserveon the defensive with respect to such questions as why not publish theminutes on a current basis, and why not publish the minutes of theBoard of Governors concerning other aspects of monetary policy. 12/3/63 -58-Prospect of publication might also raise questions within the Com-mittee with respect to the amount of detail that should be includedin the minutes.Mr. Ellis thought the Committee might be deceiving itself ifit felt it could win supporters for the System by this means. Therecord would still be incomplete; potential defenders of the Systemwere apt to sit back, and attackers would find more ammunition to useagainst the System.In the long run, Mr. Ellis said, almost any written materialmight appropriately become public information. If the Committeedecided to publish the minutes he would urge a longer lag than 3years. He did not mean to be wholly negative on the issue; his intentwas to suggest that the Committee direct its efforts to the goal ofproviding a more complete rationale of System policy actions.Mr. Irons said that he had swung back and forth in his think-ing on this subject. He believed the Committee had to distinguishbetween the submission of minutes to Congress and their general pub-lication. He suspected the Committee would have to submit its minutesto Congress if the demand was pressed. He thought there was a gradualerosion in process with respect to supplying materials to critics.Whatever they were given would leave them unhappy; if they were sup-plied with minutes after a 10-year lag they would want them with a5-year lag, and so forth. This gradual erosion of the central bank's 12/3/63 -59-position was going on in a lot of other areas and this should bekept in mind.If the Committee did publish the minutes, Mr. Irons continued,they would not be a best seller. The public generally was not in-terested in this sort of reading material, and the minutes would haveonly limited use. If both Congress and the general public were ex-cluded from consideration there would not be too many readers left,except the group of academicians who like to pore through such material.The question then was whether satisfaction of this group warrantedpublication. Even to a scholar the minutes would become pretty dullafter he had read them for a year or so. Mr. Irons said he was notbeing critical of the minutes, but those for successive meetingsinevitably involved a great deal of repetition. Another problem wasthat the minutes by no means reflected fully the work, thought, andgeneral preparation that lay behind them. This raised the questionof whether supporting memoranda and other Committee materials shouldbe made publicly available to give a complete picture. Publicationof the minutes was a first step that could lead to requests for otherpolicy record's, such as the minutes of the meetings of the FederalReserve Bank directors regarding discount rate actions, those of theBoard of Governors regarding approval of such actions, and so forth.Mr. Irons said that he realized that he was being prettynegative in his comments, and he wondered if there were alternatives 12/3/63 -60-to the release of Committee minutes. For example, would it be pos-sible to employ some capable person whose intellectual honesty wasunquestioned to author a set of volumes on the history of the FederalReserve System, giving him access to the minutes and other materials?Choice of such a person would always be open to criticism, but thepossibility was worth giving some thought to.If the Committee decided to release the minutes in some formor other, Mr. Irons said, he would suggest doing so on a limitedbasis. Perhaps a copy or two could be put on the shelves of eachFederal Reserve Bank library for use of scholars. For such a purposethe 1951-1960 period would be excellent. It represented a 10-yearperiod from the date of the Accord, and the gap from 1960 to datewas good. He did not think that this would solve the problem, how-ever. The Committee undoubtedly would be criticized for not makingminutes for the last two years available.Mr. Swan said that he was in substantial agreement with theopinions already expressed. He thought that reasonably currentexplanations of policy and descriptions of the Committee's processesand procedures were desirable goals, and he noted that some progresstowards them had already been made. However, he doubted that publica-tion of the minutes would help to accomplish those ends. It wouldput the Committee on the defensive because the minutes would be used 12/3/63 -61-primarily by System critics. There would be pressure for more andmore current release. In Mr. Swan's judgment 3-5 years was too shorta lag.On the other hand, Mr. Swan said, there was a legitimatequestion of whether such information was ever to be made available.The System might want to face this question in terms of the possibil-ity of releasing Open Market Committee and perhaps Board minutes onsuitable occasions with a very long time lag. Surely, Mr. Swan said,after a period as long as 20 to 25 years such records were strictlyhistorical documents. It could thus be recognized that in due coursethese materials would be made available to people with a legitimateinterest. To go beyond such a procedure would create many more pro-blems than it would solve. However, the Committee should be consider-ing doing something in terms of articles on a continuing basis.Mr. Deming said that he had been thinking on the same linesas Mr. Irons. He felt that for a variety of reasons it would be wellto attempt to get some assistance in writing a System history. Itshould be possible to work out a procedure that would provide anobjective set of histories and under which the System would be pro-tected against charges of self-interest. Perhaps the professionalsocieties might be asked to select scholars for the work and founda-tions asked to provide funds. The System could then make recordsavailable to such scholars as were selected, up almost to a current 12/3/63 -62-date. This would be a monumental and time-consuming task, Mr. Demingsaid, but it might be broken down into separate economic, political,and social h:.stories of the System.With respect to the minutes of the Open Market Committee andother policy-making bodies of the System, Mr. Deming continued, ratherthan publication he would favor their deposit in various places aftera time lag of a decade or more; at the present time he would suggesta cut-off at 1950. He saw no reason for the System to make its recordsgenerally available all over the United States, but their deposit inFederal Reserve libraries would be appropriate. On the other hand,he would give scholars designated to write a history access to allmaterials almost up to the present. He thought it was valid to saythat the great mass of people--including academicians--do not under-stand how the System functions but he also thought they would behelped more by a series of histories than by such raw materials asthe minutes. He had in mind very detailed histories, not works of100 pages or so.With respect to the distinction between making materialsavailable to the general public and to the Congress, Mr. Deming said,he did not know whether the System was required to supply detailedminutes of the Open Market Committee or the Board or other Systemgroups to Congress, but he hoped it was not, at least not without aspecific legislative change. He thought the answer to this question 12/3/63 -63-was not clear, and the Committee should resist such submission aslong as it possibly could on all the grounds that had already beenmentioned. He felt it was not a negative approach for the System tokeep its current minutes reasonably confidential but to throw openits records to scholars competent to write System history.Mr. Scanlon said he fully agreed that a better understandingwas needed of the Committee's operations and problems. He also sharedMr. Irons' view that the questions of responding to Congressional re-quests for the minutes and of making them publicly available wereseparate. Unlike Mr. Deming, he thought the Committee had no choicewith respect to meeting Congressional requests; it would have to makethe records available by some means if asked. As to supplying in-formation to the public, Mr. Scanlon said, he doubted that theminutes as now prepared were a good vehicle for the purpose. Theywere incomplete in that they did not include the memoranda, the dailywires, and all of the other materials that the Committee consideredin preparing to make its decisions. They also would appear highlyredundant to readers. He would hope for a better vehicle for gettinginformation to the public. A history of the System might be useful,or perhaps some kind of an annual report with a time lag of about 5years. He would be willing to give a little on the time lag. If adecision were made to release the minutes to the public, he wouldfavor limiting the distribution of copies to Federal Reserve Bank 12/3/63 -64-libraries and National Archives. He did not think it would be desir-able to spend a lot of money to make wide public distribution.Mr. Clay expressed the view that publication of the minutesas soon as 3 years after the meetings might well result in an un-conscious speaking for the record by participants and would change thenature of the meetings in an undesirable way. He did not consider theminutes a very good public relations document; it would be difficultto get useful information from them regarding the nature of Systemoperations. He thought that the Chairman's letter of last year tcMr. Patman gave very good reasons for withholding the minutes. Thisletter, in fact, was a better public relations document than theminutes, because it portrayed an organization capable of withstand-ing pressure. Such an organization was desired by everyone, what-ever their policy views.The Longer the time lag before publication, Mr. Clay continued,the less effect there would be on the nature of the meetings; but alsothe greater would be the reduction in the public relations value of theminutes. If the Committee decided to publish the minutes, Mr. Clayfavored a limited edition with a lag of at least 5 years. He thoughtpublication would best be at a time when there was no outside pressurefor it. The present was a good time, since there was no pressure onthe Committee now. 12/3/63 -65-Mr. Wayne said that the Committee was a public body chargedwith public responsibility, and accordingly, he thought that theofficial records of its deliberations were properly viewed as publicdocuments. He was not considering the matter in terms of publicrelations at all; as historical documents the minutes should be madeavailable to competent historians. He was prepared to concede thedesirability of a time lag in publication, and recognized that therewould be pressure to reduce the lag. Some might even argue that theCommittee should release its minutes on a current basis. But he didnot believe this was the sort of thing the Committee was dealing with.The question before the Committee was whether or not it could workout some method of making documents of historical value available tocompetent historians with an appropriate time lag. He thought theCommittee could rationalize the 10-year time period. It seemed tohim that the minutes should be made available at the National Archives,the repository for national historical documents. He added that hefound much merit in the suggestion that the Committee attempt to finda competent historian to prepare a System history.Mr. Wayne continued by remarking that he had recently reviewedback minutes of the Committee and had not found them entirely dull fromthe standpoint of economic history. Nor had he found anything of whichthe Committee need be ashamed; the minutes spoke of careful, competentdeliberations. He believed they should be made available to competent 12/3/63 -66-scholars. Microfilming was not expensive; microfilm copies might beplaced in the National Archives and in the libraries of the Board, theFederal Reserve Banks, and the greater universities.As to the time lag, Mr. Wayne said, he thought it would takevery close to a 5-year lag if members were to avoid any tendency tospeak for the record. He also considered this lag appropriate inlight of the fact that the Administration changed every 4 years. Alag of 3 years seemed to him the minimum, and he would prefer 5 years.Mr. Mills said that he agreed in every respect with the positionChairman Martin had taken. He thought the Committee should publish theminutes for the period 1951-60. For those who were fearful of criticismbut at the same time would be willing to produce the minutes at the re-quest of Congress, he would point out that the only occasions that Con-gress had to request the minutes stemmed from criticisms of Systempolicy, so the Committee was just fostering the criticism. Publicationof the full minutes would, in his view, serve as an antidote tocriticism and would win adherents to offset the critics.Mr. Robertson said he found himself in accord with Mr. Wayne.The Federal Reserve System was a Governmental institution and a servantof the public. As such, its records should be made available for publicinspection. He would prefer not to publish the minutes in book form,but to make them available on a limited basis in Federal Reserve li-braries and at National Archives and in microfilm form at some univer-sities. He also would make available the minutes of Board actions but 12/3/63 -67-only with a substantial time lag, because Board minutes often dealtwith specific institutions. For minutes of the Open Market Committee,a 5-10 year lag would be appropriate, and a 5 year lag probably wasadequate.Mr. Robertson said he had no objection to an extension of the"article" approach, but he considered it unwise for the Federal Reserveto attempt to select a historian to write a history from the System'spoint of view. It was difficult to learn enough about any individualto know whether his ideas coincided with the System's viewpoints, andin any event historians should be objective and write history as theysee it--rather than as we would direct or desire. As to the span ofthe history, it would be desirable to start from the beginning of theSystem and come up to whatever lag period the Committee decided wasappropriate.Mr. Shepardson said that as a public body the Committee'sactions were appropriate for the public record after such time lapseas might be considered necessary. But there was a question in hismind as to whether the "records" necessarily included all the internaldocuments used in arriving at a conclusion. The idea of a quarterlyreport had some merit, but he was doubtful whether public recordsshould necessarily include all of the internal discussion reflectedin the minutes. For that reason, Mr. Shepardson said, he had not beenparticularly enthusiastic about publication of the minutes. On the 12/3/63 -68-other hand, the point had been made that the Committee had been calledupon to submit the minutes to Congress. Whether or not Congress couldappropriately demand the minutes might be a consideration. He doubtedthat it lacked the authority to do so, and if this view was correct itprovided an argument for making the minutes available to other peopleby placing them in a repository open to anyone interested.Mr. Shepardson said that he was cynical enough to expect thatthe greatest use of the minutes would be made by those who were tryingto pick out something for their own particular purposes. People onboth sides--defenders and attackers--might do that. At least therewould be an opportunity for those interested in defending the Systemto do so, although he doubted that it. would work out that way. Heagreed with the suggestion that the System should try to get, througharms-length selection, someone who would write an objective history--hopefully one that would be more readable and more useful than theminutes themselves.Altogether, Mr. Shepardson said, while he did not generallylike the idea of putting out the Committee minutes as a public document--and he thought the minutes of the Board had to be considered along withthose of the Committee--perhaps it could not be avoided. It might bebest done by making the minutes available at appropriate referencecenters. As to the time lag, 5 years might be a good principle. A3-year lag was implied in the suggestion that the minutes be published 12/3/63 -69-for the 1951-60 period. However, if the Committee should now decideto publish the minutes for this period, another year probably wouldpass before they were ready for release. In a final comment, Mr.Shepardson said he agreed with Mr. Clay that if the Committee wasgoing to publish its minutes it would be better to do so when it wasnot under pressure rather than act in response to pressure.Mr. Mitchell said that if the matter came to a vote he wouldnot vote against making the minutes available. Nevertheless, hequestioned whether this was the best course of action. He thoughtit a mistake to believe that the minutes could be confined to thehands of objective, competent scholars, and he did not shrink partic-ularly from putting -the minutes in the hands of hostile critics.While he was prepared to release the minutes on any basisagreeable to others, Mr. Mitchell continued, he thought publicationof past minutes would not meet the real issue. He had thought quitea bit about the matter and had come to the conclusion that it wouldbe desi able to make available a digest of the minutes every 3 months.Such a digest was the real solution to the problem of telling peoplewhat the Committee was doing. If it were well and responsibly pre-pared it would conceal nothing of relevance; it would reflect thedifferent points of view expressed and the personalities of the variousparticipants. It also would be a much more polished document thanwere the minutes. 12/3/63 -70-Mr. Hickman said he would go along with those who favoredpublishing the minutes as a whole rather than attempting to havethem digested by an unbiased scholar. Such a person would be dif-ficult to find; everyone had certain predilections and feelings inthese matters. He recently had reviewed the record and thought ita good document which spoke for itself. In his judgment putting outthe minutes for 1951-60 would not be a disservice to the System, andwould be preferable to having the so-called unbiased work done. Ifthe document was deposited in public libraries in microfilm form, itwould give the unbiased student some idea of how policy was formulatedin the System. It would give him a feeling of democracy at work withall points of view represented; and would demonstrate that the Com-mittee was not a group of people representing the moneyed interests.Publication of minutes, Mr. Hickman continued, also would helpstudents focus on some of the real problems of monetary policy, suchas the problem of appropriate target variables. Students would tendto do a search on positive problems, and the Committee might get someconstructive help. With respect to the time period to be covered, Mr.Hickman favored publishing the minutes through the year 1960.Mr. Bopp said that as one who had spent some 10 years doingresearch on the System before entering its service he had greatsympathy with the proposal to publish the minutes. At the same time,he agreed with an observation contained in a memorandum that had been 12/3/63 -71-prepared for Mr. Deming, to the effect that bad books can be turnedout more quickly than good ones. This lee him to feel that it wouldbe desirable for the System to get foundation money to finance aSystem history. He recalled that the Rockefeller Foundation had onceprovided funds for such a study, but the only product had beenProfessor Chandler's book on Benjamin Strong.Mr. Bopp thought it would be desirable to have a competentscholar--perhaps one selected by a committee of the American EconomicAssociation--write a System history. If this could be done, he said,he would make the minutes available subsequent to publication of thehistory. As to the time lag, it seemed to him that it should be onthe order of a decade, although he realized that the whole characterof the Federal Open Market Committee was now changed and that policywas no longer formulated as it was years ago. In addition, it seemedto him that the Committee had made significant progress in providinginformation in such forms as the Bulletin articles by Mr. Coombsdescribing the System's foreign currency operations and by Mr. Stonereviewing open market operations in 1962. These were excellent worksand it would be desirable in the future to have similar reports on asemiannual basis. Possibly the Committee could have a quarterly reviewof policy published in the Bulletin with a 3-month lag. He was generallyin favor of publishing the minutes but he did have some concern aboutthe hazards of making them available to anyone; the initial reactionswere apt to be critical. 12/3/63 -72-Mr. Patterson reported his belief that Mr. Bryan still sub-scribed to his statement of April 1962 in favor of publishing theminutes with a time lag of 5 years.Mr. Shuford said that he concurred in the view that recordsshould be made publicly available insofar as practicable, becausethe Committee was a public institution. But it seemed to him thatthere were limitations. For one, the effect of publication on thenature of the meetings and on the nature of the record had to be takeninto consideration. There also was a question of how current publica-tion would be. Thirdly, there were statutory provisions that the Com-mittee should consider with respect to the release of its records.Although the Committee was a public body, Mr. Shuford said, he con-sidered the Chairman's letter to Mr. Patman a good statement on whyits minutes should not be released. He doubted that publication ofthe minutes would accomplish the intended purpose or that it wouldsatisfy all those interested in the Committee's work. As far as thegeneral public was concerned he thought there would be little interestin, or public relations value to, the minutes. As far as others wereconcerned, the Committee would be faced with a problem of the lag; itwould be argued that if the records should be made available becausethe Committee was a public body, they should be made available as soonas possible. 12/3/63 -73-Mr. Shuford commented that he was not disturbed by the con-tents of the minutes, which in his judgment reflected supportableviews. But if they were published with any lag the Committee wouldalways be subjected to criticism by some who would want somethingmore--more recent minutes, more materials on matters discussed inexecutive session, perhaps verbatim transcripts. Taking this stepwould not answer all questions.Reverting to the question of statutes, Mr. Shuford noted thatthe Committee had made much material available that was not requiredby statute, and it could do the same with its minutes. However, thestatute did specify the means for the Committee to supply informationon its operations to the Congress and the public: through the AnnualReport of the Board of Governors. It seemed preferable to him tomove through such channels rather than to take some other voluntaryaction. He liked Mr. Deming's suggestion for having System historiesprepared, and did not think the ends that would be served by suchhistories would be accomplished by making the minutes available. Inhis judgment there was a considerable amount of similarity betweenthe Committee and other groups, such as the courts, that met inexecutive session. He noted that the courts published only theirdecisions and regarded their deliberations as intramural.Mr. Balderston said that, as he had observed in earlier dis-cussions of this matter, te thought it was unfortunate that when the 12/3/63 -74-Committee turned over its 1960 minutes to a Committee of Congress,the latter Committee then hired a pair of scholars of its own choos-ing to prepare a digest. He was happy that so far the CongressionalCommittee had not published that digest. He favored publishing theminutes as suggested initially by the Chairman, for the reasons givenby Messrs. Wayne, Mills, and Robertson. But he had been impressedwith the argument of Messrs. Deming and Bopp that if the Committeewas to publish the minutes it should give a running start to ascholar who, if not of the Committee's selection, would at least beselected from a list that the Committee had approved. On this plan,an instructive document would be available to the public at about the timethe minutes were placed on the shelves of Federal Reserve Bank andother selected libraries. He suggested that the Committee act today,first to authorize the Secretary to proceed with the reproduction ofa moderate number of copies of minutes for 1951-1960, inclusive, andsecondly to implement Mr. Deming's suggestion. He was not sure thatit was necessary for the funds to come from a foundation but he agreedthat the selection of the scholar should not be made by the FederalReserve alone.Mr. Balderston continued by observing that he was sensitiveto the fact that since 1960 the Committee had moved into new areas.Specifically, Mr. Coombs' reports often referred to other nation'sproblems. While it was proper that this information should be revealed 12/3/63 -75-to the Committee, he would hope that if at some future time theminutes for last year and this year were made public all referencesto other nations would be excluded.Chairman Martin said that in his opinion the Committee hadhad a useful discussion on the matter of publishing the minutes.However, he did not think that putting the question to a vote at thistime would solve the problem. He thought everyone ought to continueto study the question; much depended on the particular methods ofreleasing information that individuals had in mind. He proposed thatthe Committee request Messrs. Sherman and Young to make a summary oftoday's discussion on the basis of the minutes, and that the Committeetake up the matter again early in the new year.Mr. Swan noted that most of the dicussion had centered aroundthe minutes for 1951-1960. If the Committee released these minutes onany basis, he said, it immediately would be faced with legitimaterequests for records going back to 1914. Chairman Martin said thatthis was true, but he doubted that anyone would feel strongly thatinformation for the earlier years of the System should be withheld.Mr. Shepardson suggested that the Committee ask the Secretaryto explore the possibility of obtaining the services of a writer toprepare a System history.Mr. Hayes commented that this suggestion seemed to prejudgethe issue. He did not feel there had been any agreement at thismeeting on a course of procedure. 12/3/63 -76-Chairman Martin expressed the view that the Committee shouldcontinue to explore the matter. He noted that for years there hadbeen discussions of the possibility of having a System history pre-pared. Also, the Committee previously had considered publication ofthe minutes, and from time to time had been under pressure to releasematerials. He considered the position taken in his letter to Mr.Patman to be valid, and he thought that the Committee could hold tothat position if it so chose. But in one way or another the Committeehad to come to grips with the fact that its decision-making process--which in his opinion was a good one--was not sufficiently understood.This was the basic problem. He did not think this sort of problemshould be resolved unless the Committee was virtually unanimous.Accordingly, he would propose that the matter be held over for furtherconsideration.Mr. Shepardson said that he had suggested some investigationof the possibility of having a history written not with the idea ofaction but in order that a report could be presented for discussionbefore a decision was taken on release of the minutes.The Chairman concurred in the proposal that this question beexplored. Mr. Young said that he could discuss the matter with thePresidents of the two main foundations and with the President of theAmerican Economic Association. 12/3/63 -77-It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal OpenMarket Committee would be held on December 17, 1963.The meeting then adjourned.Secretary