 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Systemin Washington on Tuesday, October 1, 1963, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Martin, ChairmanMr. Hayes, Vice ChairmanMr. BalderstonMr. BoppMr. ClayMr. IronsMr. MitchellMr. MillsMr. RobertsonMr. ScanlonMr. ShepardsonMessrs. Hickman, Shuford, and Swan, Alternate Membersof the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Ellis, Bryan, and Deming, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Boston, Atlanta, andMinneapolis, respectivelyMr. Young, SecretaryMr. Sherman, Assistart SecretaryMr. Kenyon, Assistant SecretaryMr. Hackley, General CounselMr. Noyes, EconomistMessrs. Baughman, Brill, Eastburn, Furth, Green,Holland, Koch, and Tow, Associate Economi.stsMr. Stone, Manager, System Open Market AccountMr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open MarketAccountMr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of GovernorsMr. Broida, Assistant Secretary, Board of GovernorsMr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Yager, Chief, Government Finance Section,Division of Research and Statistics, Boardof GovernorsMiss Eaton, Secretary, Office of the Secretary,Board of Governors 10/1/63Mr. Heflin, First Vice President of the FederalReserve Bank of RichmondMessrs. Holmes, Mann, Ratchford, Rawlings, Jones,and Grove, Vice Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of New York, Cleveland,Richmond, Atlanta, St. Louis, and SanFrancisco, respectivelyMr. Litterer, Assistant Vice President, FederalReserve Bank of MinneapolisMr. Eisenmenger, Director of Research, FederalReserve Bank of BostonMr. Cooper, Manager, Securities Department,Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkUpon motion duly made and seconded,and by unanimous vote, the minutes of themeeting of the Federal Open Market Com-mittee held on August 20, 1963, wereapproved.Before this meeting there had been distributed to the Committeea report from the Special Manager of the System Open Market Account onforeign exchange market conditions and on Open Market Account andTreasury operations in foreign currer.cies .or the period September 10through Septenber 25, 1963, together with a supplementary reportcovering the period September 26 through September 30, 1963. Copies ofthese reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.Supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs commented that theU. S. gold stock remained unchanged this week for the seventh successiveweek. He was hopeful that the Treasury would be able to get by foranother month without showing further losses. From time to time therehad been a certain amount of speculative buying of gold in the Londonmarket, but this influence had been overshadowed by heavy Russian sales 10/1/63 -3-to finance wheat purchases in addition to the usual seasonal needs.At the beginning of September the gold pool reserve was reduced to alow level, but since then it had been rebuilt and some gold had beendisbursed to members of the pool.Mr. Coombs observed that the preliminary U. S. balance ofpayments figures suggested improvement in the month of September fromthe heavy August deficit. While one would not be able to tell withcertainty until the figures for the third quarter were available inmore detail, he had the impression from various sources that theremight be a major improvement occurring in the capital market, with avirtual freeze on new foreign long-term issues, and possibly asubstantial decline in short-term outflows. This could conceivably beoffset by delay on the part of corporations in repatriating profits,due to some concern about the possibility that additional measures mightbe taken that would impair their ability to invest funds abroad.A hopeful sign in the short-term capital area was the fact thatNew York City banks seemed to be moving into a stronger competitiveposition vis-a-vis the Euro-dollar market and Canadian banks. A three-month rate of 3-5/8 per cent was now fairly common in New York City,with a number of quotations at 3-3/4 per cent recently, as compared withEuro-dollar rates of 4-1/16 to 4-1/8 per cent and a Canadian rate of3-7/8 per cent. Even a slight stiffening of rates here, combined with a 10/1/63 -4-slight easing of European and Canadian rates, could bring about asubstantive return flow of deposits.The foreign exchange markets had been beset by severepressures, mainly focusing on the Canadian dollar, the Dutch guilder,the German mark, the Swiss franc, and the Italian lira. A deficitin the Italian payments balance was appearing again, and there wereindications that the Bank of Italy might be about to put pressure onItalian commercial banks borrowing in the Euro-dollar market. Thiswould be helpful in bringing down Euro-dollar rates. If the Bank ofItaly were unsuccessful in its endeavor, it would be faced with achoice of accepting heavy reserve losses or seeking credit assistanceby drawing against the Federal Reserve swap facility or going to theInternational Monetary Fund. In an effort to relieve somewhat thisprospective pressure on the Italian payments position, Mr. Coombs hadrecommended to the Treasury that the Stabilization Fund begin toacquire lire against dollars in anticipation of prepaying lira-denominated Treasury bonds. This suggestion had been accepted, andthe program was under way, with about $15 million of lire having beenpurchased thus far. It was also important, Mr. Coombs added, to injectinto the picture the concept of reversibility as far as Treasuryintermediate-term foreign currency bonds were concerned.In the case of the Swiss franc, Mr. Coombs said that more than$100 million in forward contracts had been made for the account of the 10/1/63 -5-U. S. Treasury to stem the volume of capital flows into Switzerland.Speculation cn the possibility of some drastic revision of theinternational financial system being proposed at Fund and Bankmeetings had probably played a role, and credit conditions inSwitzerland were a bit on the tight side. In the past few days thepressures had become even stronger, and it was impossible to deal withthem through forward operations. The Swis% National Bank was compelledto take in over $50 million, putting dollar reserves above the usualceiling of $175 million. It seemed desirable to mop up the surplusdollars by drawing on the swap facility wit.h the Bank for InternationalSettlements, and this had been done. If there should be an improvementin psychology, perhaps the Account could begin reverse operations.During the past period, there had also been severe pressure inthe guilder market.Thereupon, upon motion duly made andseconded, and by unanimous vote, theSystem Open Market Account transactions inforeign currencies during the periodSeptember 10 through 30, 1963, wereapproved, ratified, and confirmed.Mr. Coombs recommended renewal, on a three-month basis, of theswap arrangements with the Swiss National Bank, the Bank for Inter-national Settlements, the Bank of Italy, the Austrian National Bank, andthe Bank of Sweden, all of which were to mature shortly (the most recentrenewals were dated July 18, 1963, in the first three cases, July 24 in 10/1/63 -6-the fourth case, and July 17 in the final case). The amounts of thecurrent swap arrangements were $50 million with the Bank of Sweder.,$150 million with the Bank of Italy, $100 million with the SwissNational Bank and the Bank for International Settlements, and $50million with the Austrian National Bank.Mr. Swan noted that the Austrian swap was originally designedfor the purpose of delaying gold losses temporarily, and he inquiredas to the current situation.Mr. Coombs replied that Austria was continuing to run a balanceof payments surplus and that he saw no turn in the immediate offing.It seemed inadvisable to draw on the swap, in these circumstances, totry to mop up the surplus dollars. Probably the only answer, asidefrom gold sales, to further Austrian acquisitions of dollars would bethe issuance of U. S. Treasury foreign currency bonds; since theTreasury had that facility available, it seemed prudent for theFederal Reserve to stay out of the picture.Mr. Mills noted that certain European countries, such asAustria, with balance of trade deficits were balancing their inter-national accounts through tourist trade revenues. In Italy, particularly,there had been comments recently concerning the pressure Italy wasfeeling at the present time because of the seasonal reduction in touristexpenditures, which was aggravating the balance of payments deficit. Heinquired whether there appeared to be any inclination to reduce imports 10/1/63 -7-from the United States as a means of lessening dependence on touristexpenditures.Also, there was an outflow of dollars from this country in theform of such expenditures that could be plugged quickly if theGovernment saw fit.Mr. Coombs observed that any such restrictive action mightresult in quick retaliation abroad. Various types of moral suasionmight be used to some extent, but drastic efforts to reduce touristexpenditures could result in the use of retaliatory measures.In further discussion of this point., it was mentioned thatrestrictions on tourist expenditures had been dropped by all of themajor industrialized countries except Japan and that the introductionof new restrictions in that regard by countries with convertiblecurrencies might raise questions under Article VIII of the Articlesof Agreement of the International Monetary Fund. It was also notedthat in the case of Austria, for example, tourist expenditures by U. S.citizens formed only a small part of the total tourist revenue.Mr. Coombs then noted that the International Monetary Fund,at its annual meeting now in progress, would probably recommend acomprehensive study of ways and means of dealing with the problem ofinternational liquidity. The System's reciprocal currency arrangementswith foreign central banks performed an important function in providingsuch liquidity. If these arrangements were to come under some type of 10/1/63 -8-international study, he thought it would be desirable to close anyremaining gaps in the network and try to improve the alignment ofthe individual swap arrangements to such extent as might seemindicated in the light of potential payments swings. The Committeehad discussed this on a number of occasions; and at the last meetinghe had suggested the desirability of increasing the size of theGerman and Italian swap lines. The potential swings in the Germanand Italian dollar positions as the result of temporary seasonal orother reversible flows clearly appeared, in the light of actualexperience, to exceed the $150 million swap lines now in force. Hewould, therefore, like to request authorization to negotiate with theGerman Federal Bank and the Bank of Italy to increase the swapagreement to a level of $250 million in each case.Mr. Mills inquired as to the reason for an undertaking ofthat sort with Italy when the payments swing was moving against thatcountry, and Mr. Coombs suggested that it was necessary, in thesematters, to tink in terms of a two-way street. When a foreign partnergot into difficulty, it was just as iportant to do what was possiblethrough the swap arrangements to support its position as for thatcountry to support the U. S. position when this country was indifficulty. If the Italians ran into balance of payments problems, asin recent months, it would be more advantageous for the United Statesand for the world payments system if these swings could be taken care 10/1/63 -9-of through the use of such arrangements than if alternative measureswere used that would have an adverse impact on the U. S. balance ofpayments deficit.Mr. Mills inquired whether, in the case of Italy, the proposalwas aimed at providing background support for the lira; whether, eventhough there was not an urgent need for this country to help, Mr. Coombswould anticipate their drawing on the swap arrangement even in advanceof repayment of the longer term debts this country had already incurredin Italy.Mr. Coombs indicated that he was hcpeful that the Treasurywould move to prepay outstanding lira-denominated bonds, but he doubtedthat this would suffice to take care of the possible deficit in theItalian balance of payments. In the present situation, it seemed likelythat the Italians would draw on the swap. On the other hand, the Systemhad drawn on the swap too, and the Treasury had done a great deal offinancing in Italy. Over the next few months, the System might have todraw on the enlarged German swap; and the Italians might have to drawon their swap arrangement.Mr. Mills asked whether the Italians had indicated that theyhoped for an increase in the swap, and Mr. Coombs said the Italianshad indicated that they felt a bit short in terms of international credit.They were seeking an increase in their quota from the Fund, but in theshort run they might well have a need for immediate credit. The mosteffective way of supplying that credit would be under the swap. 10/1/63 -10-Mr. Mitchell inquired whether the Bank of Italy should notinitiate negotiations if it felt the current swap line was inadequate,and Mr. Coombs replied that in due course he thought such a generalprocedure would be appropriate. In actual fact, however, the Systemhad taken the lead throughout in the swap arrangements; it was beinglooked to for leadership and guidance. There were competing ideas asto just where the whole development of the international financialsystem might be going, with some individuals supporting ideas thatwere not at all sympathetic to the U. S. He continued to feel thatfor quite a while the System might have to retain the initiative.Chairman Martin expressed the view that while the problem hadnot been solved entirely, considerable progress had been made indeveloping an understanding of what was involved.Mr. Hayes emphasized the helpful attitude of the Italiansduring the past couple of years at times when the U. S. needed help.He agreed with Mr. Coombs that this country was being looked to forleadership in the new fabric that was being built. Other countriesseemed to like the idea of increasing the swap lines; this was a fullycooperative move and not something the System was trying to press, butthe System was being looked to for guidance.Mr. Robertson asked whether the enlarged swap line had alreadybeen discussed with the Italians, and Mr. Coombs said that System repre-sentatives had been raising general questions over a period of monthsas to what extent swap lines should be tied into swings in payments 10/1/63 -11-positions. This had been done in the case of the Bank of Italy.There had been nothing very specific in these discussions, but thepossibility of increasing the swap facility had been mentioned.System representatives had taken the line generally that this was afluid, experimental thing, and that there was a real possibility incertain instances that larger credit facilities might be useful.Mr. Ellis suggested that as long as the U. S. remained in adeficit position, the swap arrangement was looked upon as another stop-gap device to help the U. S. with its balence of payments problem.Each time the swap lines were increased piecemeal, this added to theimpression. He asked whether it seemed that with the two proposedincreases, tne swap network might remain in status quo for some periodof time.Mr. Coombs replied that with these two increases, and withtwo other proposals that he would mention later, he felt that theswap network would be pretty well rounded out.Mr. Mills stated at this point that he would feel obliged todissent from the Italian proposal as being premature. It wasimportant, he thought, that the record disclose this discussion becausethis appeared to be a turning point. The range of procedures that wasproposed to be followed varied from some of the considerations thathad drawn the Committee initially into the program of foreign currencyoperations. 10/1/63 -12-Mr. Hayes then commented that it seemed to him that from theoutset the Committee had recognized that, although the pressures thenbeing dealt with were nearly all against the dollar, the swap arrarge-ments were two-way facilities.Chairman Martin expressed the view that it would be unfortunateat this juncture to say that this was the point where the swap programwas going to be cut off. It seemed to him that these experimentaloperations hac been useful and effective.Mr. Mills commented, however, that in the Italian matter theSystem was offering a plan that had not been proposed to it, and withno fundamental reason that he could see for undertaking it at thispoint. He alo suggested that Committee representatives should becautious about engaging in conversations leading to commitments onbehalf of the Committee.Mr. Coombs replied that there had been no commitment. It seemedto him that it was essential, in such a matter, for the Committee tohave knowledge as to how a foreign central bank would react; whethe. itwould look with favor or disfavor upon a particular operation. Thissort of thing was discussed in general terms on a regular basis.Otherwise, he would not be able to inform the Committee as to how thewhole picture was shaping up in the eyes of the foreign central banks.Chairman Martin commented that he felt there had been an ev-olution of thinking even within the Committee, which had been somewhatskeptical in its original approach. In his opinion, considerable progress 10/1/63 -13-had been made But negotiations, to be successful, had to be conductedover a period of time and in a framework of continuous discussions.Mr. Mitchell again raised the question whether it would notbe appropriate in principle to let the Bank of Italy bring up thematter of an increase in the swap line. He recalled that the Com-mittee had discussed on several occasions possible guidelines for thesize of swap agreements. A staff memorandum had been prepared at onepoint that, as he recalled, indicated that it was not practicable tolay down hard and fast guidelines, so the Committee had been movingmore or less as the need dictated. He did not feel that there wasanything to dictate a need for an increase in the swap agreement withthe Bank of Italy as far as the System was concerned.Mr. Coombs expressed doubt that it was possible to calculatetoo far in advance. A year ago, for example, it would have beendifficult to foresee developments that led now to suggest increasirgcertain swap lines.Mr. Robertson inquired about the possibility of acting on abasis whereby the Committee would agree to approve an increase in theswap agreement if the Bank of Italy so requested, and Mr. Coombssuggested that if the System approached the German Federal Bank andnegotiated a swap increase, the Bank of Italy might wonder why it hadnot been approached in similar fashion. If the System waited to beapproached, that might create some misunderstanding. 10/1/63 -14-Mr,. Hickman referred to the beneficial effects, in terms ofthe U. S. balance of payments, from a drawing by the Bank of Italyunder the swap facility as opposed to possible alternative procedures,following which Mr. Balderston said that when the Committee initiatedthe foreign currency program, he was somewhat concerned about howthese arrangements might end up. Although his concern had beendissipated, .t seemed to him that one criticism that had been leveledshould be dissipated, namely, that the United States had arranged theseoperations ir. order to avoid meeting the basic issue of re-establishingequilibrium in its balance of payments. Unless the System continued totake the initiative in arranging these swaps with foreign central banks,the critics would be confirmed in their opinion that the System's onlyinterest was in meeting U. S. difficulties rather than in working withthe industrialized nations toward the development of a formula thatwould meet speculative runs on a currency. If the Committee were toapprove the German swap increase, but. not approve the Italian, thatwould confirm the views of the critics that the U. S. was looking outfor itself only.Mr. Hayes said he thought it was worth stressing that, whilethe Italian balance of payments picture looked rather weak now, suchthings have a way of changing fast. It had been only about a yearsince the Italian picture looked very strong, and the U. S. Treasurywas concerned about how to meet the pressure on the dollar. This was 10/1/63 -15-a country of considerable importance, with payments swings largeenough in both directions to warrant a swap agreement of $250million.Mr. Mitchell then indicated that although he would preferto have the Bank of Italy approach the Federal Reserve, he would notpursue the point further. He would withdraw his objections on thatbasis.Mr. Mills stated that he would wish to be recorded asdissenting. He thought it was important that there be a clearindication in the record that the subject had had exhaustive dis-cussion., and was anything but a closed matter.Thereupon, upon mot on duly madeand seconded, the renewal for threemonths each of five reciprocal currencyagreements that were to mature shortly,as recommended by Mr. Coombs, wasauthorized; and Mr. Coombs was author-ized to negotiate increases from $150million to $250 million each in thereciprocal currency agreements with theGerman Federal Bank and Bank of Italy.The actions taken were by unanimousvote except that Mr. Mills dissentedfrom authorizing the negctiation of anincrease in the swap agreement with theBank of Italy.Mr. Coombs said there was ample evidence that the presentswap arrangement with the Netherlands Bank, for $50 million, was on thelow side. There had been drawings on three occasions, each time in thefull amount of the swap, and flows into the Netherlands had from time 10/1/63 -16-to time been eavy. In the most recent instance, rumors of arevaluation cf the guilder contributed to a large flow of dollarsinto Amsterdam. The System drew under the swap arrangement anddisbursed the full amount, but the dollar holdings of the NetherlandsBank were still above the ceiling. The issue was clear: the arrange-ment of additional financing under the swa. or purchases of gold bythe Netherlands. The Netherlands Bank would be agreeable to anincrease in the swap facility to $100 million, and he would sorecommend, with the understanding that probably the additionalguilders would immediately be drawn and disbursed to bring the dollarholdings of the Netherlands Bank back down to around $200 million.In discussion, Mr. Coombs said that the original skepticismof Netherlands authorities with regard to the swap agreement procedureappeared to have diminished as the result of the record that had beencompiled of liquidating drawings promptly; there was recognition ofthe fact that the Federal Reserve had adhered to its promises withregard to the nature and objectives of the swap program. As to theconsequences of the speculation engendered by rumors of devaluationof the guilder, Mr. Coombs pointed out that Amsterdam is a relativelysmall money market; he felt that the flow of funds into the Netherlandsmight rather promptly be reversed.Thereupon, upon motion duly madeand seconded, and by unanimous vote, 10/1/63 -17-the Special Manager was authorizedto negotiate an increase from $50million to $100 million in the swapfacility with the Netherlands Bank.Mr. Coombs then brought up the question of entering into aswap arrangement with the Bank of Japan. He pointed out that Japanis a major industrial nation, a sizable factor in international trade,and experiences important swings in its payments balance. Thedeterrent to entering into negotiations with the Bank of Japan hadbeen its lack of status under Article VIII of the International MonetaryFund; the yen had not yet qualified as a fully convertible currency.However, it was anticipated that the Japanese Minister of Finance,during the Fund and Bank meetings, would probably announce Japan's firmintention of moving to Article VIII status next year. There was also astrong likelihood that Japan would be brought into the Organization forEconomic Cooperation and Development group within the next month or so.In a sense, once these moves were accomplished, Japan would be evenbetter qualified for inclusion in the swap network than some of thesmaller European countries. In view of what might now be regardedmore or less as a certainty, that is, the obtaining of Article VIIIstatus, Mr. Coombs could see considerable advantage in anticipatingthe step by bringing Japan into participation in the swap network, andin so doing roundirg out the network, possibly in more or less finalform, especially as to geographical coverage. If the Committee should 10/1/63 -18-want to adhere strictly to Article VIII status as a prerequisite forparticipation in the swap network, there might be a compromisearrangement under which a standby swap agreement with the Bank ofJapan would be negotiated and announced, subject to the understandingthat neither the Federal Reserve nor the Bank of Japan would drawagainst the swap until the Japanese move to Article VIII status hadbeen formally completed.In discussion of the matter, Mr. Mills said that he wouldraise even more strongly in the Japanese case the objections he hadexpressed with regard to the Italian proposal. He felt that anapproach to the Bank of Japan would be premature in the extreme. TheCommittee had received from the staff, under dates of September 27and 30, 1963, an extensive survey of the Japanese economic andfinancial position which showed that the Japanese external short-term debt was far in excess of gold and foreign exchange reserves.Also, there had been a sharp rise in imports and a rapid growth inthe deficit on trade account. If the swap arrangement were approvedat the present time, this would be one less reason for the Japaneseto subscribe to sound international financial principles according toMonetary Fund discipline, because they would have another line ofcredit at their disposal.Mr. Coombs said that if Japan were in a basic deficit posi-tion, he would assume it would be made quite clear to Japan that it 10/1/63 -19-should go to the Monetary Fund rather than draw under a swap arrange-ment. Adherence to the basic rules of the game was expected on thepart of all partners to the swap agreements; all of the swap arrange-ments were subject to the explicit understanding that no drawingswould be made except by mutual agreement.Mr. Balderston asked Mr. Coombs whether it might not bewell if the Open Market Committee were to withhold any negotiationor announcement of a standby arrangement with Japan until Japan'sArticle VIII status was definite. If this were done conditionally,it might encourage approaches from other countries for inclusion inthe swap network.Mr. Coombs replied that he thought the Committee mightprefer to move fast and give the impression that the swap networkhad been completed. He felt that it would be a mistake to allow theswap program to extend beyond the major industrialized countries,and sooner or later this would have to be made clear on the record.As long as a lace was held open for Japan in the swap network, thereseemed more risk of vulnerability to other approaches.Mr. Mitchell commented that the swap relationships with theEuropeans were regarded by Latin American countries as an evidence ofsolidarity and mutual concern that the United States did not share sofar as they (the Latin American countries) were concerned. It seemedto him that a rounding out of the swap network by bringing Japan into 10/1/63 -20-it would only give added impetus to the feeling that the UnitedStates was nct too much interested in the countries to the south.From the standpoint of the future, he felt that this country shouldbe showing a great deal more interest. in that area. The Committee,he noted, has not considered carefully the proposition that a swaparrangement with Japan would constitute the end of expansion of theswap network for some time to come. Thus far the Committee hadproceeded on a case-by-case basis, as the need dictated. Accordingly,he was rather surprised by the comment that. a Japanese agreementwould close the swap network for some time to come; this wouldrepresent a major decision that should receive considerable attentionon the part of the Committee.Chairman Martin noted that the problem here was a littledifferent from the German and Italian matters, previously discussed,because the Japanese were anxious to come into the swap system. Thecurrency, however, was not yet fully convertible, which raised aquestion as to how to handle the matter.Mr. Mitchell said that he would feel more comfortable if hehad more time, and the benefit of the thinking of others, on theproposition of confining swap arrangements essentially to countrieswithin the OECD group. He would not feel prepared to take a positionon that issue today. 10/1/63 -21-Chairman Martin then asked Mr. Coombs whether it would servehis purpose if the Committee authorized him to talk to the Japaneseand bring back to the Committee for consideration any proposal thatmight be suggested.Mr. .ayes commented that there were pressures from manydirections for building greater international liquidity, and some ofthese pressures were from persons who would build it in a much lesseffective way than through the methods being used by the System andthe Treasury. He felt that an effective structure of bilateralarrangements, with the inclusion of Japan, would act as a deterrentto the less sound suggestions that were circulating in a number ofhigh places around the world.Question was raised whether an understanding, in connectionwith a swap arrangement with the Bank of Japan, that the facilitywould not be utilized until Japan achieved Article VIII status wouldbe likely to speed up that process, and Mr Coombs pointed out thatcertain regular procedures would have to be followed before ArticleVIII status could be obtained. He doubted that the necessary actionscould be taken before next February or thereabouts. Asked whetherthe Japanese might not be particularly anxious to obtain a swap lineof credit as a support against speculative pressures attendant uponthe achievement of Article VIII status, Mr. Coombs said he would notexpect the yen, if fully convertible, to be subject to any greater 10/1/63 -22-speculative pressures than had existed thus far. However, there werecertain trade relationships between Japan and the Western countriesthat would have to be worked out. In further discussion, Mr. Yourgrecounted the extent of steps taken to date, and remaining to betaken, by Japan in the removal of restrictions on current accountpayments. Question also was raised as to the possible magnitude ofany swap arrangement with the Bank of Japan, and Mr. Coombs said thathe was not sure. As an offhand guess, he would say something in theorder of $150 million.Chairman Martin then suggested again that Mr. Coombs beauthorized to discuss the matter of a possible swap arrangement withthe Bank of Japan, with the understanding that the matter would thenbe brought back to the Committee for further consideration. In themeantime the staff could prepare a memorandum on the whole problemof the scope of the swap network for consideration by the Committee.There was general agreement with this suggestion.Mr. Coombs said that his last recommendation related toforward operations. In an appendix to the Special Manager's report tothe Committee on operations during the period September 10-25, 1963,there appeared a summary of operations for Treasury account in forwardCanadian dollars. Briefly, incident to the Russian wheat deal inprocess, there was in prospect a heavy transfer of U. S. dollars toCanada. This had resulted in a heavy demand for forward Canadian 10/1/63 -23-dollars, which in turn added considerably to the interest arbitragein favor of Canada. If this process had been allowed to run itscourse, conceivably it could have resulted in a heavy flow of short-term funds to Canada. Through operations of the Bank of Canada andof the New York Reserve Bank (acting for the Treasury) to sellCanadian dollars forward while buying Canadian dollars spot, thepremium on the forward Canadian dollar disappeared. This squeezedout the arbitrage in favor of Canada and nipped what might have beena sizable flow of funds. The operation had been a useful one, andthe Canadians were pleased with it. He could visualize that fromtime to time in the future similar operations might be of considerablehelp in checking, before they got under way, arbitrage flows of evengreater magnitude than what had been the potential flow to Canada.If there was an authority for operating in the forward market on suchoccasions--selling forward and simultaneously buying a currency spot--some outflows of short-term capital could be checked. He would like,therefore, to request authority, up to a total of $50 million, forbuying foreign currencies spot and selling them forward for thespecific purpose of restraining short-term capital outflows inducedby arbitrage considerations. This would be in addition to the twooutstanding authorizations for forward operations, each in the amountof $50 million, that related to covering commitments under swapdrawings. In discussion, a suggestion was made that it might bepreferable to raise the over-all authority for forward transactionsto $150 million, such figure to cover all three types of such opera-tions, and Mr. Coombs replied that he would welcome the additionalflexibility.Accordingly, upon motion duly madeand seconded, and by unanimous vote, thecontinuing authority directive forSystem foreign currency operations wasamended, effective immediately, to readas follows:The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is authorized anddirected to purchase and sell through spot transactions anyor all of the following currencies in accordance with theGuidelines on System Foreign Currency Operations reaffirmedby the Federal Open Market Committee on March 5, 1963, asamended May 28, 1963:Pounds sterlingFrench francsGerman marksItalian lireNetherlands guildersSwiss francsBelgian francsCanadian dollarsAustrian schillingsSwedish kronorThe Federal Reserve Bank of New York is also authorizedand directed to operate in any or all of the foregoingcurrencies, in accordance with the Guidelines and up to acombined total of $150 million equivalent, by means of:(a) purchases through forward transactions,for the purpose of allowing greater flexibilityin covering commitments under reciprocal currencyagreements;(b) purchases and sales through forward aswell as spot transactions, for the purpose of10/1/63-24- utilizing its holdings of one currency for thesettlement of commitments denominated in othercurrencies; and(c) purchases through spot transactionsand sales through forward transactions, for thepurpose of restraining short-term outflows offunds induced by arbitrage consicerations.Total foreign currencies held at any one time shallnot exceed $1.75 billion.Before this meeting there had been distributed to the membersof the Committee a report covering open market operations in U. S.Government securities and bankers' acceptances for the period September10 through September 25, 1963, and a supplementary report covering theperiod September 26 through September 30, 1963. Copies of thesereports have been placed in the files of the Committee.In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Stone commentedas follows:The money and securities markets have weathered the pastthree weeks of advance refunding and tax and dividend paymentsquite smoothly. Net reserve availability was permitted torespond flexibly to market needs, rising when those needs wereat their peak and then moving lower as the needs receded. Inthis way it was possible to maintain a generally steady day-to.-day tone in the money market. The great bulk of Federalfunds trading was at 3-1/2 per cent, while member bankborrowing fluctuated quite sharply from day to day but, onaverage, was in the recent range variation for the period asa whole. Once again, events during the period were a reminderthat summary reserve statistics are an imperfect guide to thecondition of the money market--particularly when distributionwithin the total may swing so sharply from day to day andwhen even the aggregates themselves are subject to substantiallater revision.System operations withdrew reserves to offset marketforces in the first half of the recent period. These with-drawals were undertaken cautiously, however, in view of the10/1/63-25- 10/1/63great volume of churning in financial markets around the taxdate and in connection with the advance refunding. StartingSeptember 19, the System turned around and began supplyingreserves as market factors absorbed them.The advance refunding, of course, has been the centerof attention in the long-term bond market during the pastseveral weeks. As described in the written reports, theadvance refunding of some $6-1/2 bill:on out of $23 billionof public holdings of rights was considered a highly satis-factory result--both by the Treasury and in the market.Public takings of $3.7 billion of the new 4's of 1973 and$1.3 billion of the reopened 4-1/8's of 1989-94 wereespecially gratifying in view of the recent comments made bysome market observers to the effect that current long-termrates were out of touch with the "real" state of demand andsupply because of official purchases of intermediate andlonger issues.The dealers took substantial positions in the refundingissues, and thus far have been willing to reduce those posi-tions orly at rising prices--and even then they have shownno aggressiveness in letting bonds go. The atmospheresurrounding this distribution process, and the bond marketin general, remains good. Prices of most longer term issuesare above their levels of three weeks ago notwithstandingthe larger-than-expected additions to supplies produced bythe exchange.In the meantime a better at.mosphere has also emerged inother long-term markets. Last week, a high grade industrialbond offering in the amount of $100 million sold out quicklyat a yield well within the range of recent reoffering yields.In the tax-exempt area, distribution of the slower-movingrecent offerings has picked up after prices were reduced andthe latest offerings have moved quite well. Further testsawait the tax-exempt market, however, with a large calendarof offerings to be assimilated in the weeks ahead.Turning to Treasury bills, there was some concern ex-pressed at the last meeting of the Committee to the effectthat demand for bills growing out of the advance refundingmight tend to pull rates substantially lower. As it turnedout, the demand for bills from sellers of rights tapered offin the latter part of the period that subscription bookswere open, and offsetting upward pressures on bill ratessoon emerged as the mid-month tax date approached. Investmentdemand reappeared after the tax date but market supplies,-26- 10/1/63augmented by the Treasury's second monthly offering of one-year bills, have been adequate and no serious erosion ofrates has developed. In yesterday's auction the 3- and6-month rates were set at about 3.41 and 3.52 per cent--roughly 5 basis points higher than they were three weeksago, but within the range in which they have recently moved.Treasury financing operations in the next few weeks areexpected to center in the bill market. Payment is beingmade today for the second billion dollar offering of month-end one-year bills, which raises about $0.5 billion newcash after paying down a $0.5 billion issue of maturing1-1/2 per cent notes. On October 15 there is a $2.5billion maturity of the old quarterly series of one-yearbills, and it is expected that the Treasury will meet mostof this outpayment through the sale of $2 billion of Marchtax anticipation bills. Later in the month they may sella $1 billion strip of bills to recoup the balance of thecash drain on October 15 and to raise some additional cash.And of course they plan to sell, around the end of themonth, the third in the monthly series of $1 billion one-year bills. Finally, the Treasury plans to announce theterms of its November refunding on October 23 or 24.Our projections, and particularly those of the Board'sstaff, point to a substantial bulge is reserves during thelast two weeks of the period ahead. The offsetting ofthat bulge could push us close to, and possibly through,the $1 billion limit on net changes in the Account. To beon the safe side, I should like to recommend that the limitbe raised from $1 billion to $1.5 billion for the nextthree weeks.Thereupon, upon motion duly madeand seconded, and by unanimous vote,the open market transactions in Gov-ernment securities and bankers'acceptances during the period Septem-ber 10 through September 30, 1963,were approved, ratified, and confirmed.The staff economic and financial review at this meeting was inthe form of a visual-auditory presentation, for which Messrs. Garfield,Hersey, Altmann, and Axilrod of the Board's staff joined the meeting.-27- Other participants included Messrs. Noyes and Koch. Copies of thetext of the presentation and of the accompanying charts have beenplaced in the files of the Committee.The introductory portion of the review, presented by Mr. Noyes,was as follows:On occasion, economic news of little significance initself because it is attributable to special circumstancescalls our attention to important questions that mightotherwise escape our notice. The decline in industrialproduction from July to August was news of this sort. Itreflected chiefly a cut-back in steel output as a sequelto the earlier build-up of stocks. To a lesser extent itreflected a moderate further decline in auto output froman exceptional high in June. Other industrial activitiestaken together showed only a little further increase, butthis should not be considered exceptional for a singlemonth in a period of generally rapid advance. Thus theAugust drop in the index may be explained away. The decline,nevertheless, brings into the foreground of discussionquestios concerning more fundamental changes in the courseand composition of production--questions already implicitin the rapidity and unevenness of the advance from Januaryto July.First, we will review the general course of eventssince the cyclical low in February 1961. An initial rapidadvance in 1961, and then a more moderate rise, broughtoutput to a level in July 1962 that was 9 per cent above theprerecession level of the spring of 1960. Production heldunchanged at this level for 7 months, through January thisyear. As late as March, evidence of the direction of thenext move did not seem conclusive to most observers. Thiswas partly because the previous period of recovery andexpansion, from the low in April 1958, had lasted only alittle over two years and on this precedent a decline mightbe due. Actually, output had started to rise in February andby July it was 6 per cent higher than in January.The expansion of 1954-57 lasted a little over threeyears, an unusually long period in the annals of cycles. Isthe present period perhaps of that sort? Similarities can befound, but the differences are great. The advance in10/1/63-28.- 10/1/63production from January to July this year was sharper thanany rise after the early stages of the 1954-57 expansion,disregarding the steel strike of July 1956. Also,production in July this year was appreciably higher rela-tive to the prerecession rate than production in early 1957,the corresponding time in that upswing.With the unemployment rate generally between 5-1/2 and6 per cent, labor force use in the past year and a half hasbeen between 94 and 94-1/2 per cent. This is close to thelevel prevailing in 1959-60 but appreciably below the 96per cent rate from early 1955 to mid-1957. Also, the rateof use of capacity for production of major materials thisyear has been well below the 90-92 per cent range prevailingfor several quarters in 1955 and 1956.With resources being utilized less fully than in1955-57, competition from abroad keener, and belief in theinevitability of creeping inflation at. least suppressed byevents in recent years, industrial commodity prices thistime have not changed enough to have any appreciable impacton broad indexes. By early 1957--the corresponding date inthe expansion of the middle 50's--industrial prices hadrisen 10 per cent. Wage rates also show a contrast, risingat a rate less than two-thirds as fast in the recentexpansion.In addition to these marked differences from themid-1950's in production, resource ut.lization, and pricesfor goods and services, there are many other differences.These include a different balance of payments situation,much keener competition from abroad, less volatile behaviorof interest rates, and the implications of the tax bill nowbefore Congress. It thus seems evident that no closeparallel with the past can be drawn, and that our attentionshould instead be focused on the nature of recent changes.There followed sections dealing with foreign developments andthe balance of payments, industrial employment and activity, businesscapital expenditures, prices and credit market developments. Theconcluding portion of the review, presented by Mr. Koch, was as follows:We have touched on a wide range of economic developmentsat home and abroad. We have called particular attention to-29- 10/1/63the sharp rise in industrial production from January toJuly, achieved with only such price increases as have beenlargely offset in their effects on the broader indices bydeclines elsewhere. The advance in output, we have noted,was so rapid and so much greater in materials than infinal products that some slowing down in the advance andsome shift in the composition of the advance seem to beindicated. We have made no prediction on the course ofprices, not regarding the firming in numerous markets asconclusive evidence of the beginning of a widespreadadvance, yet not accepting the view that there is enoughslack in current and prospective resources use to makeunnecessary concern for developments in this area.Nevertheless, unemployment continues to be a seriousproblem. It was still at a level of 5-1/2 per cent in thethird quarter. Over the past year the unemployment ratehas changed little, while GNP has risen over $30 billion.Turning more specifically to monetary policy, enoughtime has now elapsed since the actions taken in July toevaluate in a preliminary way their effects. On thedomestic side, the major effect has been in firming moneymarket conditions somewhat further. Customer loan ratesat bank. have apparently shown little change. The risein longer term interest rates in early September was morea reflection of the Treasury advance refunding than ofmoney market conditions. It is interesting to note thatthe narrowing of the spread between short- and long-terminterest rates in 1963 has had more the characteristics ofnormal behavior of the rate structure in a period ofeconomic expansion and reduced monetary ease, that is, thewhole structure of rates has risen, with short ratesrising more than long rates.As for other basic effects of monetary actions, theevidence is by no means conclusive. The money supplydeclined in August but rose again in September. Thus farthis year, it has increased at a 3 per cent rate. Growthin bank loans and investments slackened in August, but,like money, picked up fairly briskly in September. Theserecent changes in money and bank credit were probably moreaffected by changes in the intensity of private demands forbank funds and in the specific timing of Treasury financingoperations than by changes in monetary actions.The changes in maximum rates payable on time deposits,and action on the part of some banks in raising actualrates paid, led to a sharper increase in the volume of such-30- 10/1/63deposits outstanding during late July and August thanearlier. In September, however, the rate of increaseslackened, in part reflecting some deposit liquidation fortax payment purposes.The evidence on the effect of this summer's policychanges in international capital flows is also mixed.Some offsetting actions and developments have occurred inforeign rates and forward discounts. As a result, thecovered rate differentials on money market paper betweenNew York and London, and between New York and Montrealhave not changed much. Also, Euro-dollar rates have risen,although not so much as to offset fully the rise in short-term U. S. rates.On the other hand, the bank-reported outflow of fundsabroad has slowed down substantially. That outflow, whichaveraged $150 million a month during the second quarter,was reduced substantially in July and still further inAugust. But the magnitude of recent flows of funds abroadnot reported by banks is still mostly unknown. Moreover,exchange market developments during September suggest arise in short-term outflows, especially to Canada butperhaps also to some Continental European countries. Theseflows, however, apparently were due mainly to factors otherthan interest rate considerations.The sharp reduction in bank-reported flows in Julyand August, together with very light offerings of new issues,has no doubt reduced the over-all U. S. payments deficitfrom its very high second quarter rate. But after gratify-ing resuts for July, a deterioration occurred in August.Tentative weekly figures for September are inconclusive.In deciding on the most appropriate monetary policyfor the next few weeks, attention might well focus on thefact that demands for funds picked up in September. Ifthis pickup continues, additional upward pressure oninterest rates could develop as a result of market forces.Any diminution in the savings flow would accentuate thistendency. In this case, the Committee might wish to permitthe increased demands for funds to be reflected, in part atleast, in higher rates of interest. This would seem a moreappropriate course than further action on the supply sideto inch up rates. On the other hand, as the analysis thismorning suggests, the pace of economic expansion couldslacken and the savings flow could continue robust, in whichcase interest rates might come under some downward pressure.In this case, forthcoming balance of payments developments-31- 10/1/63could be a key factor in deciding whether such downwardinfluences on interest rates might more appropriately beoffset or allowed to materialize.The Chairman then called for the go-around of comments oneconomic conditions and monetary policy beginning with Mr. Hayes whopresented the following statement:As we meet today, two and a half months after theSystem's latest policy moves with respect to the discountrate and Regulation Q, it seems appropriate to review verybriefly what has happened in the principal areas to which wemust give our attention in formulating monetary policy.We find that the domestic business situation has con-tinued to improve gradually, and that despite a dip inAugust due largely to a few special factors, there isappreciably more optimism on the outlook for business thanthere was in July. The major price indices have still notbroken out of the narrow range in which they have movedfor some four years, though there have been enough increasesfor individual products to suggest a need for watchfulness.Liquidity continues ample, with no clear evidence that ourseries of moderate moves toward lesser ease has appreciablyslowed the substantial rate of bank credit expansion thathas characterized the past year or more. Banks are stillavidly seeking additional loans, both here and abroad. Thelevel of short-term market rates has risen part way towardthe new discount rate but is still short of it by about 1/8per cent, long-term rates have firmed only very slightly,and the pronounced success of the Treasury's advance refund-ing operation has pointed up the continuing abundance ofsavings in relation to the demand for long-term funds.Firally, while the balance of payments should show someimprovement in the current quarter over the very sad showingof the second quarter, the deficit is nevertheless runningat an unsustainably high rate, and the complications intro-duced by the interest equalization tax make it virtuallyimpossible to measure the results of our own policy actions.In any case, we are not achieving the degree of improvementthat the world at large, and especially the principalforeign holders of dollars, many of whom are representedhere in Washington this week, might reasonably expect inthe light of the Administration's ringing pronouncements ofmid-July.-32-- 10/1/63To cite a few recent developments in greater detail,statistics that have become available since our lastmeeting suggest that the August dip in business activitywas largely attributable, directly or indirectly, to theautomobile model changeover and the continuing steelinventory adjustment; but that there was also a slowerrate of advance in other sectors, with the notable excep-tion of retail trade, which continued to move aheadstrongly. With auto production now moving up, with thesteel picture brightening, and with a generally favorableprospect for consumer buying and business investment inplant ard equipment, it seems likely that a pick-up ingeneral activity may have occurred in September or willoccur at the latest in October. One encouraging item isthe rise in after-tax corporate profits in the secondquarter to the highest level since the fourth quarter of1950. After-tax profits plus depreciation allowancesreached an all-time peak, and the ratio of this aggregateto GNP equaled the previous peak of the last quarter of1955. Even the unemployment statistics provide someslight cegree of comfort, in that the unemployment ratefor married men moved down in August to 3 per cent--a fullone-half of a percentage point below a year earlier, andthe lowest level since 1957.The stock market's performance, with the majoraverages having broken into new high ground early inSeptember, is perhaps symptomatic of the relatively highdegree of business optimism. That optimism will not belessened by the fact that the tax reduction bill hasfinally emerged from the House of Representatives--eventhough Senate action is uncertain.As for credit developments, neither the data on totalbank credit nor those on money supply plus time depositsclearly point to a change in the rate of expansion overrecent months. Many of the elements that served to depresscredit growth in August seem to have been quite temporaryin nature. A reversal of some of these factors, togetherwith tax date considerations, was instrumental in bringinga speed-up in the expansion of bank credit and bank loansin the first three weeks of September. However, thisperiod is not long enough to take account of loan run-offsafter the tax date. New York bank loan officers do notreport any significant change in business loan demand.The revised August balance of payments deficit of $525million is close to the highest monthly deficit ever-33- 10/1/63recorded. Unfortunately, we have no detailed informationon the causes of this deterioration, but surprisingly itoccurred in the face of a sharp drop in new long-term foreignbond issues and despite some evidence of a slackening inshort-term capital outflows. Very heavy seasonal touristoutlays doubtless played an important role. In more recentweeks, substantial transfers of balances to Canada have beenreported, and it is also possible that there have been someprecautionary transfers of capital, or unusual retention offoreign earnings, by corporations that anticipate additionaltaxes or controls on capital exports. This was a dangerthat was clearly visible when the interest equalization taxwas proposed.Over the next three weeks, the System will be relativelyfree to form its policies without special consideration forthe Treasury's operations. Such financing as the Treasuryconducts will be more or less routine and will not bejeopardized by minor policy shifts. By the time of thenext Committee meeting, however, the Treasury will be on thepoint of announcing the terms of the November refunding.With the balance of payments still very serious, despitesome recent evidence of improvement in the short-term capitalarea, ard with domestic business, still quite encouraging,international considerations must inevitably continue toreceive heavy weight in the determination of monetary policy.I think we should try to maintain the momentum of whateverbenefits our discount rate action has brought with respectto capital flows. Also, the Committee members have oftendiscussed, over the past year or so, the desirability ofsome slowing in the rate of growth of.bank reserves and bankdeposits--yet to date, as I have already mentioned, thatslowing has been almost imperceptible. I believe we shouldseek a slightly less degree of credit availability, both tosupport a somewhat firmer short-term rate structure and tocause a little greater reluctance on the part of banks tolend freely abroad.In the next few months additional reserves must be pro-vided in any case to meet seasonal needs; but I would urgethat we exercise some caution in providing them, rather thananticipating these needs. I would hope that the Federalfunds rate would stay consistently at 3-1/2 per cent, thatthe 90-day bill rate would move up close to 3-1/2 per centand perhaps fluctuate moderately around that figure.Borrowings might well be allowed to average around $400million, with free reserves probably moving around the zero-34- 10/1/63 -35-level, although I would regard the level of free reserves asa secondary consideration. The directive should, I think,be modified to reflect this moderate additional move towardlesser ease.For the time being, I believe our attention should befocussed on making the 3-1/2 per cent discount rate fullyeffective rather than on any additional overt step. However.,it seems quite possible that some further discount rate actionmay be needed later this fall if the balance of payments failsto respond favorably enough to the measures already taken.Mr. Shuford reported that the improvement in Eighth Districtconditions that had occurred since the first of the year was continuing,though with some slackening in the pace of improvement in the pastcouple of months. Business loans outstanding had risen steadily sinceMarch and this, combined with the recent increase in market rates, mayhave had some effect on lending rates in the St. Louis area. In June,57 per cent of the larger loans were made at the so-called prime rateof 4-1/2 per cent, but in September only 44 per cent.At the national level, it appeared that the economic expansionthat began more than two and one-half years ago was still under way.Although the economy had come a long way since early 1961, there didnot appear tc be any apparent significant upward pressure on prices.The record of price stability during the current expansion had beenimpressive. Wholesale prices were about unchanged on balance since1961; consumer prices had risen at an annual rate of approximately1-1/2 per cent, about half the annual rate of increase during thethree previous periods of economic expansion. Since July, member bankreserves and the money supply had shown little change. However, it 10/1/63 -36-seemed more reasonable to consider monetary developments oversomewhat longer periods,and on such basis rather significant in-creases in bank reserves and the money supply could be observed.With respect to policy, Mr. Shuford saw no strong reason topropose any significant change at this time. In view of the balanceof payments situation, he would not want to see any reduction ofshort-term rates. At the same time, he felt that monetary policyshould continue to facilitate economic growth domestically. For thenext three weeks, he would aim at maintaining short-term rates atabout present levels, and he would hope that member bank reserves andthe money supply would continue to rise at moderate rates. He wouldnot recommend a change in the discount rate at this time nor wouldhe suggest ary change in the directive, except for deletion of thereference to the Treasury refunding.Mr. Bryan reported that Sixth District statistics for Augustshowed ittle change. The District figures differed from the nationalfigures in that such declines as appeared were less than nationally,while increases--chiefly on the finarcial side--were greater.Mr. Bryan said he would favor essentially no change in policy.However, reserve availability had somewhat outrun his ideas of whatshould have happened under current policy. He would prefer that freereserves fluctuate around the zero level. 10/1/63 -37-Mr. Bopp said that although Third District indicators hadshown some improvement recently, the performance was not strongenough to overcome the disappointing behavior of the economy so farthis year.As far as policy was concerned, Mr. Bopp expressed the viewthat things seemed to be proceeding reasonably well. Credit demandwas continuing moderately strong and the balance of payments seemedto have improved somewhat. Looking ahead, he would be inclined to donothing to alter present policy, with emphasis maintained on the toneand feel of the market rather than the level of free reserves. Hewould make no change in the directive except to delete the referenceto the Treasury refunding.Mr. Hickman commented that while the level of economic activityhad shown little net change in recent weeks, the tenor of recent newssuggested recovery from the more-than-seascnal late summer dip. Sofar as he could determine, production had probably increased inSeptember. Steel output, as expected, had begun to show some expat ,ion;auto out.put had increased moderately, on a seasonally adjusted bas:.s,and was expected to increase substantially in October. The retailsales picture for September was not yet clear. Auto sales were offsharply in the first 20 days of the month because of the unavailabilityof new models. Department store sales were fairly strong compared witha year ago, but looked weak when contrasted with August's record level. 10/1/63 -38-Although the industrial component of the wholesale priceindex still showed no significant change, recent announcements ofprice changes had, on the whole, been on the upside. Increases hadbecome more widespread in certain industries, such as steel, non-ferrous metals, paper, and household appliances, and were appearingin selected lines of machine tools. In this connection, the Board'sestimates of utilization of manufacturing capacity would bearwatching. The utilization figure had increased from 77 per cent ofcapacity in the first quarter of 1961 to 87 per cent in the thirdquarter of this year, and thus was nearing the 90 per cent level atwhich price pressures had appeared in the past.Economic changes in the Fourth District had been mixed,Mr. Hickman said, but with a clearly favorable development emergingin the area of insured unemployment. Insured unemployment rates inthe 14 major labor market areas of the District, after seasonaladjustment, showed 10 centers with declines in unemployment betweenmid-August and mid-September, three with increases, and one with nochange. The increases in unemployment rates occurred in steel centers.Monetary policy in the weeks immediately ahead should, inMr. Hickman's opinion, continue along the path of recent weeks, butwith the bill rate encouraged to remain in the 3.40-3.50 per centrange. Because of the higher covered yields that had recently developedon Canadian bills, and the scattered evidence of outflows of short-term 10/1/63 -39-funds to that country, he would favor a bil1 rate in the upper endof the aforementioned range, coupled, if needed, with further salesof Canadian dollars forward against purchases of spot Canadiandollars, within the new authorization of $150 million.So far as the Federal Reserve System could be effective inthe international sphere generally, Mr. Hickman suggested that theCommittee exercise its influence to persuade countries whose currencieswere strong vis-a-vis the dollar to relax their local credit condi-tions. He referred specifically to Canada, the Netherlands, Germany,and Switzerland, whose currencies had been very strong recently againstthe dollar.Mr. Hickman said that, as he had suggested in the past, hewould urge the Committee to instruct the Desk to allow bond yields todrift upward in response to natural market forces. With a period oflarge seasonal demands now approaching, reserve needs could best bemet by reducing reserve requirements rather than through open marketoperations. He would recommend no substantive change in the directive.Mr. Mitchell commented that the outlook for consumer per-formance seemed quite uncertain. The seasonals probably gave a falseimpression in August, and it was his impression that September didnot look very good. Also, it seemed to him, from looking at thecomponents, that the rise in the production index might be over for 10/1/63 -40-a while. Although he was not bearish about the business outlook, hewas not particularly encouraged by the most recent developments.On the proposition of letting the bill rate get up to thediscount rate, Mr. Mitchell felt that if the bill rate was allowedto fluctuate around the discount rate, the System would be underconsiderable pressure to raise the discount rate again. As to policyfor the pericd immediately ahead, he would go along with those whosuggested that there be no change in posture at this time.Mr. Shepardson said that he had participated yesterday in ameeting of institutional lenders to agriculture, and was interestedto find that the concern about undue extensions of agricultural credithad increased, if anything, since the group's meeting in May.Insurance company mortgage loans, both in volume and number, were upby percentages ranging from 10 per cent to as much as 35 per cent.The Farm Credit Administration was having a somewhat similar experience.All participants reported pressure to place the overabundance ofavailable funds; and all of them pointed to the "other fellow" interms of laxity in lending standards. One paper discussed by arepresentative of the life insurance companies charged an undueincrease in the money supply, taking into account time deposits.Rather grave concern also was expressed about developments in housingloans, along with concern about the farm loan situation and thecontinuing increase in farm land prices. 10/1/63Mr. Shepardson said that in light of the total situation hewould be inclined to follow the recommendations on policy that hadbeen made by Mr. Hayes.Mr. Robertson said it seemed to him the kind of economic andfinancial reorts to which the Committee had been listening todayargued strongly against any tightening of monetary policy at thisjuncture. He would, therefore, recommend no change in policy,preferring to "wait and see." Mr. Robertson then submitted thefollowing statement for inclusion in the record in further expositionof his views:It seems to me that the kind of economic and financialreports we have been hearing argue strongly for makingmonetary policy no tighter than it in at this juncture.To begin with, it seems obvious that the rate of busi-ness advance has slowed slightly in recent weeks. Thechances for any strong fall upsurge in activity have beencorrespondingly reduced. From this point of view, what weneed is a policy which helps to undergird businessconfidence rather than restrain it.On the financial side we have seen a run-up in bankloans, investments, and the money supply, but these seemlargely related to the tax date and the Treasury refundingoperation, and to that extent they have a temporary charac-ter that. does not call for any policy attention. On thecontrary, within these fluctuating totals the banking systemseems to have been moving into a significantly less liquidposition, with more borrowing from the Federal Reserve,reduced holdings of short-term Governments, and substantiallengthening of portfolios through bank participation in theadvance refunding. To this extent, banks have less room toaccommodate any fall loan expansion that ensues, and Ithink we must watch very carefully for any signs ofundesirable restraints developing from this posture.Long-term capital markets also do not seem to me to beinvulnerable to any further tightening of reserve avail-ability. A growing number of municipal market experts are-41- 10/1/63 -42-warning of the blow that could strike that market from anysignificant reduction in the rate of commercial bankacquisitions, such as might stem from even a modest degreeof reserve restraint. In the Government securities marketthere is a relatively large total of dealer investment inlong-term issues as a result of their participation in therecent refunding. This could easily produce some sharpupward pressure on rates if dealers became restive oversuch exposure or found financing sufficiently difficult tomake them want to reduce positions.Developments on the balance of payments front inrecent weeks, both good and bad, do not seem to me to bethe sort that call for monetary policy adjustments.Indeed, staff appraisals of the reported statistics sinceour raising of the discount rate and tightening of reservepolicy in the end of July do not. seem to have been able topinpoint any concrete and significant benefits realizedfrom our higher money market rates. I, for one, have nostomach for swallowing any more doses of the kind ofmedicine that has been of such little proven help in deal-ing with what really ails our balance of payments. Themachinations that have been going on in the Canadianexchange picture certainly should not lead us to take anyfurther steps to tighten our markets. Canada is onecountry where official actions on the discount rate andin the financial markets have been di-ectly designed tofrustrate any possible gains from our previous interestrate increases, and the statements of their authoritiesshould lead us to expect exactly the same type of frustra-tion if we were to endeavor to move again.I believe our best policy at this juncture should beto hold steady and watch very carefully the unfolding ofthe consequences of what we have already done. If,unhappily, business expansion should falter further, andsigns develop of reduced bank liquidity impinging uponsecurities markets and credit availab lity generally, thena prompt move back toward a more easy monetary policywould be very much in order. If, on the other hand,business should belatedly strengthen and develop some ofthe fall acceleration of which it is still potentiallycapable, then some well-timed adjustment toward morerestrictive monetary policy might be appropriate. If Ihad to choose one course or the other at this moment,I think the balance of risks is clearly in favor of easingrather than tightening. But I also believe that we have 10/1/63sufficient leeway to wait a little longer in order to besure of the direction of events before committing ourselvesfurther. Accordingly, I would favor no change in policy,no change in the discount rate, and no change in thedirective other than the dropping of the reference to theTreasury financing.Mr. Mills presented the following statement:It is now time to adapt Federal Reserve System mone-tary and credit policy to prospective financial and economicdevelopments in the last quarter of 1963. On the strengthof statistical evidence through the month of September, itis reasonable to anticipate a somewhat more than seasonalrise in economic activity over the rest of the year. How-ever, no real improvement in the nation's balance ofpayments difficulties can be foreseen, and it is possiblethat they may be aggravated by publicized arguments aired atthe meeting of the International Monetary Fund concerningconflicting theories for stabilizing the internationalexchanges. Such publicity could lead to speculation againstthe United States dollar. Although the proposed interestequalization tax seems at least to have temporarily checkedthe outflow of long-term funds, gains in that direction maybe lost through increased outflows of short-term funds,partly stimulated by the liberalizing effects of the Board'srevised Regulations M and K. The effectiveness of theFederal Reserve System's operations in foreign currencieswould be lessened by such developments. If these adverseevents should materialize, fiscal controls limiting foreignaccess to the short- and long-term U. S. capital marketsshould be instituted promptly; and it is hoped thatpreparations have been made to that end.As has been the case in 1963 to date, monetary andcredit policy must take into account both domestic andinternational considerations. As the main attack on thebalance of payments problem has focused on admittedlytemporizing Federal Reserve System operations in the fieldof foreign currencies, that have not been supported byappropriate fiscal controls for reaching the problem at itssource, the burden of attempting a solution has beenshouldered onto the Federal Reserve System and has necessi-tated a more restrictive monetary and credit policy thanis justified by present economic conditions. Without a-43- 10/1/63change in official policy attitudes bearing on the balanceof payments problem, the Federal Reserve System regrettablyis committed to promoting an interest rate policy aimed atshielding the United States against the further loss ofgold and dollars. But in view of inflationary developmentsin several continental European countries and theirunderstandably self-serving needs, races of interestabroad are tending to move up and to stay above thoseruling in the United States. As that is the case, it isunlikely that policy actions attempting to force competi-tively higher interest rates in this country can beundertaken successfully without causing a contraction ofcredit and a reduction in the money supply that wouldseverely retard any improvement in economic activitiesthat otherwise could be achieved.If the balance of payments situation should worsen, itis my belief that the Federal Reserve System should notoffer resistance by strengthening the restrictiveness ofits credit policy. There would then oe visibly good andsufficient reasons for urging the Federal fiscal authori-ties to promulgate selective controls over outward capitalflows from the United States which, if introduced, wouldserve to relieve the Federal Reserve System from adherenceto its present debatable monetary and credit policy whichis vaguely expressed in the current economic policydirective to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York as being,"conducted with a view to maintaining the prevailing degreeof firmness in the money market, while accommodatingmoderate expansion in aggregate bank reserves." Undersuch circumstances, Federal Reserve System monetary andcredit policy could proceed to concentrate on the domesticeconomy by exercising its full influence toward stimulatingeconomic growth and activity. A change in policy of thiskind shculd carry with it the opportunity for discontinuingthe pegged interest rate policy now in vogue and forreturning to a policy that would permit interest rates tomove freely in response to supply and demand factors in thefinancial markets subject only to the marginal influenceexerted by the System as it saw fit to supply or withdrawreserves from the commercial banking system, in keepingwith the justifiable credit requirements of the businessand financial communities.Release from the shackles of an artificially coddledU. S. Government securities market and return to free market-44- 10/1/63principles in the conduct of monetary and credit policywould contemplate reverting to at least a "billsusually" policy and ceasing from actions that haveattempted to raise short-term and lower long-terminterest rates. In the process of resuming this previ-ously favored monetary and credit policy, it isreasonable to expect that a nornal spread between short-and long-term interest yields on U. S. Governmentsecurities would result, and as the present flat yieldcurve disappeared, commercial bank investors could againjudge the market realistically. In that event, over-confidence in the stability of the interest ratestructure would also vanish and the temptation to commer-cial banks to extend the maturities of their investmentsin order to obtain fractionally higher interest incomewould be removed, and along with it the risk of adepreciation in their investment holdings occurring atthe inevitable time that unforeseen contingencies wouldresult in destroying the artificial structure of themarket for U. S. Government securities that now exists.Mr. Mills said that the foregoing statement contained a greatdeal of wishful thinking that he felt sure would not be realized. Inthe circumstances, it was his position that there should be no changein policy at the moment, although he would veer more in the directionsuggested by Mr. Bryan.Mr. Hflin reported that Fifth District business had maintaineda slow, sometimes uneven, upward course, much as it had over a periodof many months. Consistent gains in nonfarm employment had continuedto show that progress was quite widespread and seemingly possessed afair degree of momentum. Department store sales reached a new highin August and preliminary indications were favorable for September.Construction employment had remained at record levels, although contract-45- 10/1/63 -46-awards and building permits had sagged slightly. A note ofuncertainty existed in the District's agricultural sector, whichhad not fared as well recently as the rest of the economy. Withabout 45 per cent of the District's flue-cured tobacco crop sold,prices had averaged 4 per cent below last year, volume was downabout 16 per cent, and gross returns were off 19 per cent. Thosetrends could mean a reduction in income from flue-cured tobaccosales of as nuch as $85 million compared with 1962. Except foragriculture, trends revealed in the latest Reserve Bank survey wereagain quite favorable. General business sentiment was considerablystronger than three weeks ago, and manufacturers gave moderatelyfavorable accounts of new orders and shipments, with little or nochange in employment and hours. About one-third of the manufacturersreported wage increases.Mr. Clay said that the domestic economy appeared to beperforming essentially in line with earlier expectations. Expansionat a moderate pace appeared to have characterized the third quarter.While the record of the fourth quarter was yet to be written, con-tinued economic expansion remained a reasonable prospect. On balance,however, this meant that the domestic economy continued at an expandinglevel of activity that was inadequate to absorb the economy's growingresources. Accordingly, the domestic economy still needed thestimulus of an expansive monetary policy. 10/1/63Obviously, the international balance of payments deficitremained a serious problem, Mr. Clay noted. At the moment, thereappeared to be a need for more adequate information as to recentdevelopments in the various components of the balance and as to theresponse to public policy actions taken during the last two and ahalf months. Some additional modification in monetary policy couldbe made by the Committee within the limits of the recent change inthe discount rate. In view of the continuing question as to theappropriate role of monetary policy under existing circumstances, itwould appear to be in order at this time to await some clarificationof developments and response to policy actions already taken beforeproceeding further.Considering all factors, both domestic and internationalMr. Clay expressed the view that it would appear desirable to maintainessentially the same monetary policy posture that had developed sincethe discount rate increase in mid-July. The directive could be leftunchanged except for deletion of the reference to Treasury financing.Mr. Scanlon reported that economic activity in the SeventhDistrict had continued to improve gradually. Steel production wasrising further, the early reactions to the 1964 model autos werefavorable, grain prices were well above year-ago levels in the faceof large crops, and business sentiment was generally optimistic.Retail sales of soft goods in September apparently had not equaled-47- 10/1/63 -48-the August level, but it seemed premature to conclude that this wasthe beginning of a downward trend.Current data on savings flows, Mr. Scanlon said, indicatedthat consumers might be spending somewhat more freely. While salesof savings bonds had continued above year-ago levels, redemptionshad risen and in the early weeks of September had exceeded sales.The net inflow of funds to savings and loan associations in Augustwas below the year-ago level, largely because of an increase inwithdrawals, and at Seventh District banks gross withdrawals ofpersonal savings-type deposits rose sharply in August.Banking and credit developments in the Seventh District inrecent weeks had been similar to those for the nation, except thatthe rise of loans in the District appeared to be stronger. Althoughfor the most part District banks had been able to cover their needsin the Federal funds market, there was evidence that a few of thelarge banks had felt increased reserve pressure since early September.Two of these banks had been borrowing at the discount window rathersteadily and one had liquidated bills. For all Seventh Districtweekly reporting banks, however, sales of short-term Governments weremore than offset by purchases of maturities over five years. It wasa matter of concern to him, Mr. Scanlon said, that banks, in the faceof the yield curve, were willing to handle their portfolios in this way. 10/1/63 -49-Mr. Scanlon was gratified that it had been possible tomaintain short rates near the 3-3/8 per cent level without cuttingback on total reserves and without forcing up the over-all levelsof member bank borrowing any more than had been done. With the mid-September pressures over, this might be more difficult in the periodahead, even with the help of a cash financing and the need to supplyreserves seasonally. If the demand for funds continued in suffi-cient volume to absorb a rising amount of reserves, he would considersome further increase in short-term rates appropriate, but he wouldlike to see that pressure come from the market. It appeared to him,however, that the Committee should still give a relatively highpriority to achieving moderate credit growth. The present directiveprovided this posture, and he would favor continuing it withoutchange other than to eliminate the reference to Treasury financing.He would not favor changing the discount rate.Mr. Deming commented that since Labor Day much of the NinthDistrict had had generous rainfall, which insured excellent fallpastures and feed for livestock. A large crop outturn was nowvirtually assured. For reasons that were not apparent in view of thegood weather, the September wheat estimate was below the Augustestimate, but the wheat crop would still be good. The estimate forcorn was 20 per cent more than last year, and for soybeans 30 per cent 10/1/63 -50-more. Thus, the farm sector was in a favorable setting. Availableinformation for August and September indicated that nonfarm activityhad expanded in the District in the third quarter, and it seemedlikely that this expansion would continue in the fourth quarter,probably at an increased rate.The District bank credit situation in September showed mixeddevelopments and was difficult to appraise. September loan growthat both city and country banks apparently would be well above normaland about equivalent to last year. Almost all of the gain, however,had come in one week at mid-September when there was a sizableexpansion in business loans. It was of interest to note that,measured against a year ago, loans were up 8 per cent at city banksand 14 per cent at country banks. There was no recent informationabout the composition of loan growth at country banks. At city banks,however, the data indicated that four-fifths of the gain had come inloans to financial institutions other than banks, loans on securities(mainly to nondealers), and loans on real estate. Business loanswere up only 3 per cent and "other" loans only 1 per cent. Thepicture seemed to be one of ample--perhaps more than ample--creditsupply.Mr. Deming said that his position with respect to policy camefairly close to that of Mr. Bryan. His thinking centered more on 10/1/63 -51-reserve availibility than interest rates. While he would not resistsome upward movement of short-term rates, he would work more on theavailability side, which meant veering toward a somewhat lower levelof free reserves. He would leave the directive unchanged except fordeletion of the reference to Treasury financing.Mr. Swan said that the Twelfth District had seen a continua-tion of modest expansion in business activity. In August, totalemployment in the Pacific Coast States increased slightly more thanseasonally, with every major nonagricultural sector except miningshowing some gain. However, a still greater expansion of the laborforce nudged the unemployment rate up slightly. In the banking area,District banks, after having been net sellers of Federal funds forsome time, made larger purchases than sales in the week endingSeptember 25, and borrowing from the Reserve Bank increasedsubstantially during that week. The major banks also expected tobe net buyers during the current week. This seemed in considerablemeasure to be related to a reduction of sales of Federal funds andincreased bill purchases on the part of one bank.Mr. Swan said that the general business situation seemed farfrom exuberant. The international situation was far from satisfactory,but there had been a few encouraging developments recently. It seemedto him that no change in monetary policy was called for at this point. 10/1/63 -52-The bill rate was reasonably well in line with the discount rate,and he would hope that this relationship could be maintained for thenext few weeks. At the same time, he would want to supply reservesto meet seasonal needs quite readily. He would favor no change inthe directive except for deletion of the reference to the Treasuryrefunding.Mr. Irons reported that Eleventh District conditions weregood, with activity at a high level. As to the national economicsituation, he felt that the economy was quite strong. Some of thestatistical weaknesses in August and early September were traceablerather clearly to developments in the automotive industry and metals.There still seemed to be little change in the international picture.On the matter of policy, Mr, Irons said that he had beenquite well satisfied with developments in the past few weeks. Inhis opinion, things were at a point where the Committee could seeka lesser degree of ease over the next three-week period. He leanedtoward the view that there might be a slightly lesser degree ofreserve availability, which might have some effect on the ratestructure in the market. While he would provide reserves for seasonalpurposes, he doubted the desirability of anticipating seasonal needsor forcing them. He would seek, without being too aggressive, theachievement of a slightly greater degree of firmness in the market;in other words, to get as much of a condition of firmness in the market 10/1/63 -53-as was compatible with a 3-1/2 per cent discount rate. That wouldmean a Federal funds rate of 3-1/2 per cent and a bill rate closerto 3-1/2 per cent than at the moment. He would not be disturbed bysome increase in member bank borrowing or by some decrease in freereserves. In summary, while he would not suggest pushing aggressivelyto get the bill rate above the discount rate, he would try to achievethe full effect of the 3-1/2 per cent discount rate. What he had inmind could be accomplished within the scope of the existing directive,and he would not change the discount rate at this time.Mr. Ellis said that the New England economy continued to movealong at a pace a bit short of the nationel record. The Reserve Bankwas in the process of tabulating the semi-annual survey of manu-facturers' outlook and capital spending intentions, and if equalweight were given to all opinions, he would say that those expectingsales this fall to exceed the previous record were in excess of thoseforeseeing a decline by a ratio of five to one. Optimism with regardto 1964 sales was even more prevalent. It seemed worth noting thatsome manufacturers depending largely on defense and space-relatedoutlays expressed concern about the possibility of a drag in comingmonths as defense and space programs were reviewed.As to policy, Mr. Ellis said he agreed basically with theproposals made by Mr. Irons. He concurred in the thought that reserveavailability could well be a matter of primary concern to the 10/1/63 -54-Committee. Required reserves had been moving along at the top ofthe staff 3 per cent growth guideline, and total reserves hadexpanded more than 7 per cent in the past 12 months. This hadcontributed to a situation where foreign bankers were pointing outthat "U. S. corporations have money running out of their ears." Inthese circumstances, it was small wonder that corporate funds wereseeking outlets outside the domestic econcmy. It seemed possiblethat depreciation and investment credits might combine with a taxcut to accelerate cash flows to such extent that business firms mightbe more stimulated to make investments abroad than investmentsdomestically. These considerations led him to concur substantiallywith the views on policy expressed by Mr. Irons.Mr. Balderston noted that Mr. Hickman had expressed the hopethat perhaps European nations might take steps to lower their interestrates. He thought this unlikely, however; the wage explosion inHolland was giving the Dutch authorities great concern, and whatFrance had done to counteract the wage push was a matter of generalknowledge. It seemed to him that one could not count on inflation inEurope relieving the burden on the United States. With an averagehourly rate of 71 cents paid by manufacturing industries in France,as compared with $2.45 in this country, even if French wage rates wereto rise 10 per cent, that would be almost precisely the equivalent ofa 3 per cent rise here. One could not take too much comfort that our 10/1/63 -55-average hourly increase is running somewhat below our average annualgain in manufacturing productivity of 3-1/2 per cent even though theEuropean wage advance is ahead of the productivity increase there. Inabsolute terms, the wage differential, as distinct from the costdifferential, has not been narrowed.As to policy, Mr. Balderston said that he would subscribe tothe position taken by Messrs. Irons and Ellis.Chairman Martin noted that the Commiittee was faced again witha division of opinion as to policy. However, it seemed to him thatthe question involved only a small matter: slightly less ease. Ifhe were doing it on his own, he would side with the position ofslightly less ease as being more consistent and more appropriate, butit was not a decision that would either make or break the economy.Since there appeared to be a substantial group that did not want tochange policy at all at this time, it seemed to him that it would bewise to recogrize that fact and not overplay the thought that thesituation could be altered substantially by any very modest shift ofpolicy. Accordingly, he would suggest that a vote be taken on thebasis of no change in policy at this time, with the understanding thatany members of the Committee who dissented would have an opportunityto record their views in that way. The current economic policydirective to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York would not be changedexcept to delete "and taking account of the current Treasury refundingoperation" in the first part of the second paragraph. 10/1/63 -56-Thereupon, upon motion duly madeand seconded, the Federal Reserve Bankof New York was authorized and directed,until otherwise directed by the Com-mittee, to execute transactions in theSystem Account in accordance with thefollowing current economic policydirective:It is the Committee's current policy to accommodatemoderate growth in bank credit, while putting increasedemphasis on money market conditions that would contribute toan improvement in the capital account of the U. S. balanceof payments. This policy takes into consideration thecontinuing adverse balance of payments position and itscumulative effects and the high level of domestic businessactivity, as well as the increases in bank credit, moneysupply, and the reserve base in recent months. At the sametime, however, it recognizes the continuing underutilizationof resources.To implement this policy, System open market operationsshall be conducted with a view to maintaining the prevailingdegree of firmness in the money market, while accommodatingmoderate expansion in aggregate bank reserves.Votes for this action: Messrs.Martin, Bopp, Clay, Irons, Mitchell,Robertson, and Scanlon. Vctes againstthis action: Messrs. Hayes, Balderston,Mills, and Shepardson.Mr. Hayes stated, in connection with his vote, that he did .otfeel that all policy shifts had to be dramatic. The decision todayinvolved a relatively small matter, but he thought it appropriate torecord a dissent on the basis that a modification of policy such as hehad suggested would, in his judgment, have some significance.Upon motion duly made and seconded,and by unanimous vote, section 1(a) ofthe continuing authority directive was 10/1/63amended, in line with the earlier sug-gestion of the Account Manager, toauthorize the Federal Reserve Bank ofNew York, to the extent necessary tocarry out the current economic policydirective:(a) To buy or sell United States Government securitiesin the open market, from or to Government securities dealersand foreign and international accounts maintained at theFederal Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, regular, ordeferred delivery basis, for the System Open Market Accountat market prices and, for such Accounc, to exchange matur-ing United States Government securities with the Treasuryor allow them to mature without replacement; provided thatthe aggregate amount of such securities held in such Account(including forward commitments, but not including suchspecial short-term certificates of indebtedness as may bepurchased from the Treasury under paragraph 2 hereof) shallnot be increased or decreased by more than $1.5 billionduring any period between meetings of the Committee.At the suggestion of Chairman Martin, it was agreed that dis-cussion of the memorandum from Messrs. Young and Sherman that had beendistributed to the Committee under date of September 28, 1963, regardingthe question of making minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee forsome past period available in some manner for the use of scholars andothers be deferred until the next meeting.It was agreed that the next meeting, of the Federal Open MaketCommittee would be held on Tuesday, October 22, 1963.The meeting then adjourned.Secretary-57-