 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held onTuesday, November 26, 1963, at 11:30 a.m., EST. This was a telephoneconference meeting and each individual was in Washington except asotherwise indicated in parentheses in the ollowing list of thoseparticipating:PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Martin, ChairmanHayes, Vice ChairmanBalderstonBoppClayIronsMillsMitchellRobertsonScanlonShepardsonMessrs. Hickman (Cleveland),Shuford (St. Louis), andAlternate Members of theCommittee(New York)'(Philadelphia)(Kansas City)(Dallas)(Chicago)(College Station, Texas)Wayne (Richmond),Swan (San Francisco),Federal Open MarketMessrs. Ellis (Boston), and Deming (Minneapolis),Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks ofBoston and Minneapolis, respectivelyMr. Young, SecretaryMr. Sherman, Assistant SecretaryMr. Kenyon, Assistant SecretaryMr. Hackley, General CounselMr. Noyes, EconomistMessrs. Brill, Furth, Holland, and Koch,Associate EconomistsMr. Stone, Manager, System Open Market Account(New York)Mr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open MarketAccount (New York)Mr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of GovernorsMr. Broida, Assistant Secretary, Board of Governors 11/26/63Mr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Yager, Chief, Government Finance Section,Division of Research and Statistics,Board of GovernorsMr. Patterson, First Vice President, FederalReserve Bank of AtlantaThis meeting was held on the first business day of the Boardof Governors and several of the Federal Reserve Banks following thedeath of President Kennedy on November 22, 1963.At the request of the Chairman, Mr. Stone made a statement inwhich he reported that the Government securities market had opened ona firm and confident tone this morning. There was some buying through-out the maturity scale but little, if any, selling by investors. Therewere no signs of selling pressure--panicky or otherwise. Prices onTreasury coupon issues maturing in 1966 and later had risen slightly,and those on shorter maturity coupon issues were about unchanged.Treasury bill rates were unchanged to one basis point lower, with therate declines centered in the issues maturing in late February and inMarch. The market was giving an excellent account of itself.Corporate stock prices were making a good recovery, Mr. Stonecontinued, from the depressed levels they had reached on Friday after-noon after news of the attack on the President had been received. At11:00 a.m. the Dow-Jones average was up 10.47 points on a heavy volumeof trading. (Subsequently, Mr. Stone reported a gain of 14.64 pointsin the Dow-Jones average by 11:30 a.m.) 11/26/63 -3-Mr. Stone commented that market ideas concerning the biddingin the Treasury bill auction scheduled for later in the day rangedaround rates of 3.50-3.52 per cent on the three-month bill and 3.64-3.66 per cent on the six-month bill. These bidding ideas were closeto the rates on outstanding bills of comparable maturities.The current outlook for member bank reserves was still in needof clarification, Mr. Stone said. The latest estimates for thestatement week ending November 27 indicated net borrowed reserves of$5 million, but it was not clear how firm this figure was. The moneymarket had opened with a comfortable tone. In view of the indicatedneed for reserves and the uncertainty prevailing in the money market,the Desk was buying Treasury bills for delivery on the same day toinsure that there would be enough reserves in the banking system toprevent the money market from becoming unduly tight and generally tomaintain the steady atmosphere that had prevailed recently. Mr. Stonerecalled that the Desk had planned to buy bills on the preceding Fridayand ha been engaged in a market "go-around" when the news of theattack on the President was received. The Desk was now indicating tothe market that it was picking up where it had left off on Friday, toavoid conveying a feeling of concern about market developments or anyideas regarding rate levels. Friday's estimates had pointed to netborrowed reserves of $333 million for the statement week ahead. Ifthe market situation should turn adverse, Mr. Stone said, it would be 11/26/63 -4-necessary only to step into the market a day early to supply reservesthat in any case would be needed for the following week. (Later inthe meeting Mr. Stone noted that new reserve estimates still indicatednet borrowed reserves of $5 million for the current statement week,but that the estimate for the next statement week now stood at netborrowed reserves of $446 million. He reported that the Desk had justbought about $220 million Treasury bills in the market and would takeadditional bills being sold by foreign accounts into the System's port-folio.)Mr. Stone concluded by saying that in view of the market'sgood performance he did not feel that any special instructions fromthe Committee were needed to deal with the present situation. In hisjudgment there was ample room within the Committee's existing instruc-tions and leeway to deal with any turn in the market that seemed likely.Mr. Coombs supplemented his telegraphic report of the precedingday, a copy of which has been placed is the files of the Committee, bynoting that the foreign exchange markets had remained quiet and orderlythis morning. Exchange rates were being held by the foreign centralbanks, where necessary, at the same levels as those that had prevailedon Friday and Monday, and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York plannedto do the same in the New York market after the European marketsclosed. 11/26/63In the case of the Swiss franc, Mr. Coombs continued, thedollar had moved off the floor to a level of 4.3160 while the dollarrate on the guilder had also moved above the temporary support pointof 3.5990 introduced by the Netherlands Bank on Monday. The markcontinued in demand, however, with the Bundesbank taking in $4 millionon Monday and $28 million today. The New York Bank planned to absorbone-half of the latter amount through a swap drawing.Mr. Coombs observed that the London gold market was quietthis morning, with small volume and a fixing price identical withthat of Monday. Prices subsequently moved down to $35.08-.09. Farfrom losing gold, the London gold pool had gained $44 million sinceFriday, primarily owing to Russian sales. He had no recommendationsto make to the Committee.Chairman Martin commented that in his judgment the AccountManagement had handled things well during this period with respectto both foreign exchange and domestic transactions. He describedthe purpose of this meeting as purely precautionary. Observingthat it seemed desirable for the Committee to consider whether anychange was appropriate in its current economic policy directivetoreflect the death of the President, the Chairman read a draft para-graph that had been suggested as a possible replacement for thesecond paragraph of the directive adopted et the preceding meeting ofthe Committee (November 12, 1963) and asked for comments.-5- 11/26/63The Committee members favored revising the directive alongthe general lines of the proposal, and the discussion was concernedprimarily with specific phrasing.Thereupon, upon motion duly madeand seconded, the Federal Reserve Bankof New York was authorized and directed,until otherwise directed by the Committee,to execute transactions in the SystemAccount in accordance with the followingcurrent economic policy directive:It is the Federal Open Market Committee's current policyto accommodate moderate growth in bank credit, while maintain-ing conditions in the money market that would contribute tocontinued improvement in the capital account of the U. S.balance of payments. This policy takes into considerationthe fact that domestic economic activity is expanding further,although with a margin of underutilized resources; and thefact that the balance of payments position is still adversedespite a tendency to reduced deficits. It also recognizesthe increases in bank credit, money supply, and the reservebase of recent months.To implement this policy, System open market operationsshall be conducted with a view to cushioning any unsettlementthat might arise in money markets stemming from the death ofPresident Kennedy and to maintaining about the same conditionsin the money market as have prevailed in recent weeks, whileaccommodating moderate expansion in aggregate bank reserves.Votes for this action: Messrs. MartinHayes, Balderston, Bopp, Clay, Irons, Mitchell,Robertson, Scanlon, and Shepardson. Voteagainst this action: Mr. Mills.Mr. Mills dissented for the same reasons he had dissented fromthe directive adopted at the meeting of November 12, 1963; he thoughtthe Committee should modify its policy to one of greater ease. 11/26/63Mr. Robertson, while voting favorably on the directive, indi-cated that he would have preferred to continue the previous directiveand to issue a supplementary instruction to the Federal Reserve Bankof New York to cushion any unsettlement in financial markets thatmight stem from the President's death.Thereupon the meeting adjourned.Secretary-7-