 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Systenin Washington on Tuesday, November 12, 1962, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Martin, ChairmanMr. Hayes, Vice ChairmanMr. BalderstonMr. BoppMr. ClayMr. IronsMr. MillsMr. MitchellMr. RobertsonMr. ScanlonMr. ShepardsonMessrs. Hickman, Wayne, Shuford, and Swan, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Ellis and Deming, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Boston and Minneapolis,respectivelyMr. Young, SecretaryMr. Sherman, Assistant SecretaryMr. Kenyon, Assistant SecretaryMr. Hackley, General CounselMr. Noyes, EconomistMessrs. Baughmar, Brill, Furth, Green, Holland,Koch, and Tow, Associate EconomistsMr. Stone, Manager, System Open Market AccountMr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open MarketAccountMr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of GovernorsMr. Broida, Assistant Secretary, Board of GovernorsMr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Yager, Chief, Government Finance Section, Divi-sion of Research and Statistics, Board ofGovernorsMiss Eaton, Secretary, Office of the Secretary,Board of Governors 11/12/63Messrs. Holmes, Mann, Jones, Parsons, andGrove, Vice Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of New York, Cleveland,St. Louis, Minneapolis, and San Fran-cisco, respectivelyMessrs. Parthemos and Brandt, AssistantVice Presidents of the Federal ReserveBanks of Richmond and Atlanta, respec-tivelyMr. Clay J. Anderson, .conomic Adviser,Federal Reserve Bank of PhiladelphiaMr. Paul S. Anderson, Financial Economist,Federal Reserve Bank of BostonMr. Sternlight, Manager, Securities Depart-ment, Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkUpon motion duly made and seconded, andby unanimous vote, the minutes of the meetingof the Federal Open Market Committee held onOctober 1, 1963, were approved.Before this meeting there had been distributed to the Committeea report from the Special Manager of the System Open Market Account onforeign exchange market conditions and on Open Market Account andTreasury operations in foreign currencies for the period October 22through November 6, 1963, together with a supplemental report coveringNovember 7 and 8, 1963. Copies of these reports have been placed inthe files of the Committee.Supplenenting the written reports, Mr. Coombs commented thatthe Treasury gold stock would remain unchanged again this week, runningthe period of no change to roughly three months. The StabilizationFund now had $83 million of gold against prospective November ordersof $62 million. Some $40 million of Russian gold had been acquired 11/12/63 -3-by the Londor Gold Pool on the Friday preceding the meeting and furtherRussian sales seemed likely.Mr. Coombs reported that at Basle, where he spent the pastweekend, there had been much discussion of the Italian and Dutchsituations. Governor Carli of the Bank of Italy had given a fairlyencouraging report on the Italian problem. There had been an improve-ment in the political atmosphere. The outflow of funds from Italy hadslowed down somewhat during the past week or two, and the Governor washopeful that the record for November would be better than for October.Governor Carli had paid tribute to the cooperation of the FederalReserve and the U. S. Treasury in making possible a reduction in theItalian reserve loss during October from $270 million to the actualfigure of $153 million. The reciprocal nature of U. S. exchange opera-tions had now become increasingly clear to European central bankers,Mr. Coombs said, and he sensed a growing measure of support for U. S.policy in the international financial area.Regarding the Netherlands, Mr. Coombs reported that the Dutchgovernment had conceded the 10 per cent wage increase demanded bylabor, and the question now was whether the Netherlands Bank wouldhave to adopt a restrictive monetary policy in order to limit theinflationary reactions. The Dutch authorities were aware that a risein their discount rate might trigger other discount rate increases onthe Continent, and probably would consult with neighboring governments 11/12/63 -4-before acting. Such actions as raising the discount rate or curtailingbank reserves would result in a repatriation of funds by Dutch commer-cial banks. However, Mr. Coombs felt the Dutch authorities would beprepared to accept guilder bonds issued by the U. S. Treasury to mopup any surplus dollars, so that action by the System probably wouldnot be required.Thereupon, upon motion duly made andseconded, and by unanimous vote, the Sys-tem Open Market Account transactions inforeign currencies during the period Octo-ber 22 through November 8, 1963, wereapproved, ratified, and confirmed.Mr. Mills asked whether the growing enthusiasm for the System'sswap arrangements that Mr. Coombs had found at Basle reflected a generalbelief in ther basic usefulness or an undercurrent of concern by Euro-pean monetary authorities about their own currencies that caused themto look with favor on the additional resources the arrangements madeavailable to them. Mr. Coombs replied that originally certain Europeanmonetary officials had been skeptical about the System's motives inundertaking the swap arrangements; there was some feeling that theSystem viewed them as a one-way street, designed to help the UnitedStates alone, and that once the American problem was resolved theSystem would back away. However, developments had tended to convincethese officials that our motives were not selfish, and that we were 11/12/63 -5-prepared to help other nations with their balance of payments problemsrather than just soliciting their help with our problem.Mr. Coombs said that before making his recommendations he wouldlike to mention that while in Basle he had received the impression thatthere was a g-eater disposition than formerly on the part of the Bankof France to increase the size of their swap line with the System. Hefelt that it might be desirable to make such an increase during thenext few months.Mr. Coombs recommended renewal on a three-month basis of the$100 million swap arrangement with the Netherlands Bank, which hadlast been renewed on September 13, 1963.Renewal of the swap arragenment withthe Netherlands Bank for a further three-month period was approved.Mr. Ccombs then referred to his memorandum entitled "Requestfor authorization of spot purchases of Italian lire, and other Euro-pean currencies, and of their simultaneous forward sale to the U. S.Treasury," dated November 8, 1963, which had been distributed to theCommittee in advance of this meeting. (NotE: A copy of this memo-randum has been placed in the files of the Committee.) In accordancewith the memorandum, he recommended that the Federal Reserve Bank ofNew York be given authority to make spot purchases of foreign curren-cies in which the Treasury had outstanding indebtedness, for purposesof immediate forward sale to the Treasury to cover outstanding Treasury 11/12/63 -6-debt in these currencies. He proposed that this authorization be inthe amount of $100 million, and include provisions that purchases couldbe made at rates above par and that both the spot purchases and forwardsales should be made at the same rate.In discussion, questions were raised about the implicationsof the proposal that these transactions be authorized at rates abovepar, about the desirability of generalizing the authority beyond theItalian lira, the currency with which Mr. Coombs' memorandum was mostspecifically concerned, and about the adequacy of the proposed dollarlimitation. On the matter of above-par rates, Mr. Coombs noted thacthe Bank of Italy had chosen to defend the lira at a rate that wasrelatively high, although within the International Monetary Fundlimits, and the System had to pay the rate set in order to acquirelire. The fact that the currency immediately would be sold forwardat the same rate to the Stabilization Fund meant that the System wouldneither gain nor lose on the operation, apart from any interest earn-ings that accrued during the period it held the lire. The Treasurywould not incur a loss--in fact, would make a profit--since the lira-denominated bonds it eventually would redeem with the lire purchasedfrom the System had been issued at the ceiling and the rate wascurrently below the ceiling. While he personally felt that theItalians might have been better advised to defend the lira at a lowerrate, he thought a recommendation to this effect might be construed as 11/12/63 -7-undue interference in their affairs, and also might be embarrassingsince a lower rate would mean a larger profit to the U. S. Treasury.In Mr. Coombs' judgment the circumstance at which the recommendationwas directed was a rather special one, in which the System had anopportunity to help stabilize a situation by warehousing foreigncurrencies without capital risk until they were needed by theTreasury, whose resources for this kind of operation were limited.The recommendation did not imply any modification of the Committee'sgeneral policy that the usual types of spot purchases of foreigncurrencies should be made at or belo par values.On the question of whether the authority should be confinedto the lira or made applicable to all currencies in which the Treasuryhad indebtedness, Mr. Coombs said he had not intended to raise a matterof principle in recommending the latter. In future similar situations,he thought, there ordinarily would be ample time for him to come to theCommittee for specific authorization. On the other hand, he viewedthe recommended procedure simply as facilitating Treasury repaymentof debts denominated in foreign currencies, and thus desirable inother cases also. He agreed with a suggestion made by Mr. Ellis thatthe procedure might well provide a routine channel for redeeming out-standing Treasury bonds denominated in foreign currencies, and thoughtthat it would increase the saleability of such bonds. Mr. Coombsobserved that there was another point of major importance. If a 11/12/63 -8-foreigr. currency should be devalued, he noted, the System would suffera loss on any outright holdings of that currency, whereas the Treasurywould make a profit in connection with any indebtedness it had denomi-nated in terms of that currency. If circumstances should arise inwhich devaluation of a currency seemed inevitable, the System mightbe able to sell its holdings forward to the Treasury and thus hedgeits position. While this was a matter for the future, an authoriza-tion in the general form requested would open the way.Mr. Coombs said he thought $100 million for the proposed pur-pose would be adequate at present because it would be used as arevolving furd. By way of example he noted that the Treasury had$50 million in lira-denominated debt maturing in March 1964. Accord-ingly, if at least $50 million had been employed prior to that datefor operations in lire of the type contemplated, this amount would bereleased at that time for reemployment.After this discussion Chairman Martin commented that theprinciple of the proposed operation seemed clear. He noted thatonly a modest amount was involved, and he thought that the mainquestion in the minds of Committee members was whether the authorityshould be limited to operations in Italian lire or made general. Mr.Robertson observed that he saw no objection to an authorization drawnin general terms. He felt, however, that the contemplated type ofoperation should be viewed as an experiment, to be reconsidered bythe Committee as the occasion warranted. 11/12/63The Chairman then proposed that the Committee vote on therecommerdation, with the understanding that it was experimental andthat Mr. Coombs would keep the Committee fully informed about develop-ments.Accordingly, upon motion duly made,and seconded, and by unanimous vote, thecontinuing authority directive for Systemforeign currency operations was amended,effective immediately, to read as follows:The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is authorized anddirected to purchase and sell through spot transactions anyor all of the following currencies in accordance with theGuidelines on System Foreign Currency Operations reaffirmedby the Federal Open Market Committee on March 5, 1963, asamended May 28, 1963; provided that the aggregate amount offoreign currencies held under reciprocal currency arrange-ments shall not exceed $1.95 billion equivalent at any onetime, and provided further that the aggregate amount offoreign currencies held as a result of outright purchasesshall not exceed $150 million equivalent at any one time:Pounds sterlingFrench francsGerman marksItalian lireNetherlands guildersSwiss francsBelgian francsCanadian dollarsAustrian schillingsSwedish kronorJapanese yenThe Federal Reserve Bank of New York is also authorizedand directed to operate in any or all of the foregoing curren-cies in accordance with the Guidelines and up to a combinedtotal of $150 million equivalent, by means of 11/12/63 -10-(a) purchases through forward transactions, forthe purpose of allowing greater flexibilityin covering commitments under reciprocalcurrency agreements;(b) purchases and sales through forward as well asspot transactions, for the purpose of utilizingits holdings of one currency for the settlementof commitments denomirated in other currencies;and(c) purchases through spot transactions and salesthrough forward transactions, for the purposeof restraining short-term outflows of fundsinduced by arbitrage considerations.The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is also authorizedand directed to make purchases through spot transactions,including purchases from the U. S. Stabilization Fund, andconcurrent sales through forward transactions to the U. S.Stabilization Fund, of any of the foregoing currencies inwhich the U. S. Treasury has outstanding indebtedness, inaccordarce with the Guidelines and up to a total of $100million equivalent. Purchases may be at rates above par,and both purchases and sales are to be made at the samerates.Noting that Mr. Young and Mr. Irons had recently returnedfrom Europe, Chairman Martin suggested that they report their obser-vations to the Committee.Mr. Young said that he had attended two meetings during theprevious week one of Working Party 3 and one of the Economic PolicyCommittee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development,of which Working Party 3 is a sub-body. An interesting aspect of thisWorking Party 3 meeting was that, for the first time since the WorkingParty's origin in 1961, U. S. balance of payments difficulties were 11/12/63 -11-not on the agenda. Attention was focussed entirely on the inflationarydevelopments manifest in most European countries, especially Italy. TheItalians had had a balance of payments deficit in the past nine monthsof around $750 million, reflecting a high level of internal demand,with imports rising spectacularly and exports falling, and some flightof capital. Until October the deficit had been financed by borrowingsof Italian commercial banks in the Euro-dollar market, but in October,it had been permitted to be reflected in a decline in monetary reserves.Representatives of other European countries had been sharply criticalof the Italian performance, and the Italians had admitted that thesituation was getting out of hand and could not continue. But theyassured the Working Party that the problem was fully understood by allparties to be represented in the new governnent, and that each of theparties had agreed to the essential elements of a stabilization pro-gram, involving a fiscal effort, with a cutback of government expendi-tures, especially public investment, and some increase in revenues; ashift in practices for financing balance of payments deficits; someaction to relieve pressures in the construction industry; restrainton bank credit expansion; and a policy of restraining wage increases.From now on, as had been the case in October, deficits would bereflected in the reserve position of the central bank. It was theirhope that the deficit would taper off, and that by the middle of 1964restoration of balance in payments would be in sight, if not actually 11/12/63 -12-achieved. The Italians asked the Working Party group to express theirviews on the Italian situation in writing, to help the new governmentcrystalize its ideas on a program to bring the situation under control.The inflation in Italy, Mr. Young continued, was now beingfelt by neighboring countries in various ways. Most of the increasein exports that Germany had experienced over the past nine months hadbeen to Italy, and the same was true for France and Switzerland. TheGermans and Swiss were heavy users of Italian labor, and recentincreases in Italian wage rates had forced them to raise wages also.Spreading inflation was threatening to overrun Continental Europeunless comprehensive steps were taken to halt it.There also was a report by the Netherlands, Mr. Young said,which included a declaration that they would not use restrictivemonetary policy further than at present to meet their internal infla-tionary problems. This raised a general question of the extent towhich restrictive monetary policy might: be ued by other countries,including France, Germany, and Italy. The consensus of Working Party 3was that it was desirable to avoid higher interest rates on the Conti-nent in view of the problem they would pose for the United States.This consensus was conveyed to the parent body, the Economic PolicyCommittee. In his report, the Chairman of the latter group said heunderstood that it was not the intention of the United States to pressrestrictive monetary policy to a point where the U. S. would be bidding 11/12/63 -13-through higher interest rates, for available international financialresources. Mr. Young said he sensed a feeling at the meeting that theEuropeans would forego aggressively restrictive monetary policies as ameans of meeting their inflationary situations and would rely more onfiscal action instead.Mr. Irons said that he had appreciated the opportunity toparticipate in the meeting at Basle and to visit with bankers invarious cities on the Continent. He shared many of the impressionsMr. Young and Mr. Coombs had reported. He had found substantiallymore acceptance of the soundness of the dollar and less expectationthat it woulo be tampered with than he had noted on his trip of ayear and a half ago.In France, and to some extent in Germany, the Netherlands, andSwitzerland, there was concern about rising wage and price pressures.These countries were still importing substantial amounts of labor. TheEuropeans recognized that the U. S. was becoming more competitive withthem because of their wage and price increases. With regard to U. S.policies, Mr. Irons felt the Europeans were generally favorable towardthe recent firming of money rates, the discount rate action of July,and other actions taken in this country over the past several months.They hoped the System would not push restrictive monetary policy tothe point of putting pressure on them to drive up rates in theircountries. On one U. S. proposal--the interest equalization tax-- 11/12/63 -14-there was almost unanimous disapproval. The Europeans felt it was anextremely complicated type of exchange control, and thought it wouldbe better for the U. S. to use more direct methods, whether a capitalissues committee, a quota system, licensing, or whatever. The Euro-peans thought the United States was moving in the right direction withrespect to its balance of payments difficulties, and that the crisismight have been passed. This view was related to their feeling thatthe U. S. had become more competitive, and to their expectation thatthere would be some improvement in the capital movements situation.Before this meeting there had been distributed to the membersof the Committee a report covering open market operations in U. S.Government securities and bankers' acceptances for the period Octo-ber 22 through November 8, 1963. A copy of this report has been placedin the files cf the Committee.In supplementation of the written report, Mr. Stone commentedas follows:The past three weeks have witnessed a gradual andorderly rise in interest rates throughout the maturityscale. The fundamental influence working in that direc-tion has been a strengthening of the market's convictionthat the business outlook is undergoing significant improve-ment and that the System might respond, or be responding,by taking a firmer tack in monetary policy. In the short-term area, this shift in sentiment occurred simultaneouslywith a succession of Treasury financing operations in whichthe market was called upon to absorb sizable amounts ofshort-term issues. Either of these influences--the shiftin sentiment or the addition to the supply of short issues--would alone have exerted upward pressure on short rates. In.combination, they were mutually reinforcing in their impacton rates. 11/12/63In the long-term sector, the shift in sentiment occurredsimultaneously with a sharp bulge in new corporate and munici-pal bond issues--and both of these developments caught themarket at a time when it still had in position large amountsof intermediate and long-term issues that the dealers hadtaken out of the advance refunding two months ago. Underthese circumstances, bond prices fell and rates moved higher;and the heavy atmosphere that emerged in the long-term areaaffected, and in turn was affected by, the equally heavytone that characterized the short-term market.Developments within the period were sensitively reflectedin the experience with the Treasury's November refunding. Theterms of this exchange, in which the Treasury offered an 18-month 3-7/8 per cent note, were generally well received.Large subscriptions were entered on October 28, in some casesapparently with a view to selling out shortly afterwards witha modest price gain. The 21 per cent allotment on nonprefer-ential subscriptions, announced on October 31, was in linewith the views generally being expressed in the market, butmay have slightly exceeded the anticipations of some largesubscribers. In the meantime, with general market sentimentturning increasingly bearish (as reflected and heightenedby the rather unenthusiastic auction of 1-year bills onOctober 30), the price of the new notes moved gradually lowerin when- ssued trading--receding from a high point of 100-3/32bid on October 29 to a shade under par on November 8. .In the Treasury bond market, as I noted earlier, theshift in business sentiment reinforced pressures that werealready merging because of heavier competition from in-creased corporate and municipal bond flotations, and boththese influences converged on a narket that was alreadyrestive with its holdings of intermediate and longer-termissues. Dealers managed to reduce their holdings of over-20-year maturities by about half in the past three weeks,partly in reflection of some buying by Treasury trustaccounts and the System. Further progress was also madein cutting 5-10 year holdings, again partly in reflectionof some official purchases. Over the period as a whole,intermediate and longer-term bonds rose by 1 to 7 basispoints.In the Treasury bill market, the Treasury sold forcash in the recent period both a $1 billion strip of billsin the 3-5 month area and a $1 billion block of 1-year bills.These offerings, which bracketed the sale of the new 18-month 3-7/8's, followed a new issue of March tax anticipation-15- 11/12/63bills earlier in October. With dealers obtaining largeamounts of each of these issues, their positions rose sub-stantially within the period--in the case of bills, to wellover $3 billion at one point. But their total bill holdingswere receding by the end of the period and further sizableinroads were made last Friday when the Treasury trustaccounts bought bills in size to offset upward rate ten-dencies. On the other hand, dealer awards in last Friday'sauction were unusually large.System operations during the past few weeks were compli-cated both by the bearish atmosphere of the securities marketsand by the large reserve flows and day-to-day money marketuncertainties created by the payment for two billion dollarcash bill issues mentioned earlier. Given these uncertainties,and also given the recent tendency of reserve levels to fallshort of estimates, the Desk supplied reserves relativelyfreely over the period--meeting reserve drains from marketfactors as they occurred or even moving at times in antici-pation of those drains so as to avoid aggravating a somewhatnervous securities market with any short-term moneystringercy. Reserves were supplied nearly every day of theperiod, amounting to a net of almost $1 billion for thethree weeks as a whole. This large injection of funds wasmade through purchases both on ar outright basis and throughrepurchase agreements. Although free reserves averagedsomewhat higher than in the preceding few weeks, and memberbank borrowings averaged a shade lower, Federal funds weregenerally in firm demand at 3-1/2 per cent throughout theperiod.Reserve projections for the next few weeks suggest thatSystem operations can be more moderate than in recent weeks,and accordingly it may be appropriate to return the leewayto $1 billion from the $1.5 billion that has recently pre-vailed.In response to questions by Mr. Mills, Mr. Stone said thatdealers had not had difficulty in financing their larger bill inven-tories. A substantial volume of corporate funds had been available tothem under repurchase agreements, and their borrowing rates had in factmoved down while most bill rates were moving up. One reason for this-16- 11/12/63 -17-was that heavy demand had lowered rates on short-term bills--such asthose with December maturities--to the point where dealer repurchaseagreements were attractive to corporate treasurers. Mr. Stone did notthink there was any fundamental instability in the bill market atpresent. The market had acted about as might have been expected underthe circumstances; rates had moved up until buyers could be found forthe substantial additions to bill supplies it had been necessary toabsorb.Mr. Mitchell said that he had been somewhat disturbed by oper-ations in the recent period, and gathered that the Desk had had someuneasy days in attempting to follow the Committee's directive. Henoted that while free reserves were relatively stable in the lastreported week, excess reserves had risen to over $500 million andborrowings to about $400 million, and asked whether the figures onborrowings might not be a more sensitive indicator of market pressuresthan the free reserve figures. Mr. Stone replied that the Desk didwatch borrowing figures closely, and also paid close attention todaily and even hourly developments in the Federal funds market--whichdevelopments are often a clue to the volume of borrowings that will beforthcoming. He added that the influence of the Treasury's recent billissues, which raised new cash but did not permit payment through taxand loan accounts, had increased the difficulties of interpretingmarket developments. In connection with these issues there were 11/12/63 -18-substartial flows of funds into and out of the Treasury's balances.These resulted in unpredictable redistributions of reserves, sinceit was difficult to know the sources of inflows and the destinationof outflows. As a result, the usual money market measures were lessreliable indicators around the dates of these issues than at othertimes.Mr. Mitchell then asked how operations would have differedif the Committee's instructions at the preceding meeting had calledfor maintenance of the three-month Treasury bill rate at 3.5 per cent..Mr. Stone said that in his judgment it would have been necessary tolet free reserves rise to about $300 million, which he thought wouldhave been inconsistent with the instructions the Desk had actuallyreceived. But, he noted, there was a second aspect to Mr. Mitchell'squestion; namely, could the Desk have kept the bill rate at 3.5 percent by modifying the technical nature of operations within the termsof its actual instructions? For example, could it have bought morebills outright, and relied less on repurchase agreements in supplyingreserves? He noted that the Desk had bought about $600 million inbills in the two weeks ending on the Wednesday preceding this meeting--despite which the bill rate rose 6 basis points--and had about $300-$400 million outstanding in repurchase agreements with dealers. Itwas his estimate that the bill rate might have been lowered by one ortwo basis points if the Desk had relied largely on outright purchases, 11/12/63 -19-and had not made many repurchase agreements. However, he thought thatresale of these bills in the current week, when reserve absorption wasnecessary, could have been expected to raise the bill rate by at least5 basis points. As it was, a substantial volume of reserves would beabsorbed unobtrusively by maturation of the repurchase agreements andby redemption of the bills maturing next Thursday.Mr. Hickman referred to the Treasury's purchase of bills forofficial accounts on the Friday preceding the meeting, and asked whattheir objective was in operating on both sides of the market. Mr.Stone noted that it was routine for the Treasury to buy back newly-issued bonds for trust accounts in varying amounts, to facilitateunderwriting of the issue, and descrioed the Friday operation as anextension of this procedure to the bill market. In response to aquestion. from Mr. Swan about the probable volume of corporate andmunicipal financing in November, Mr. Stone said that it was expectedto be lighter than the near-record October volume, but still substantial.Thereupon, upon motion duly made andseconded, and by unanimous vote, the openmarket transactions in Government securi-ties and bankers' acceptances during theperiod October 22 through November 8,1963, were approved, ratified, and con-firmed.Chairman Martin then called for the staff economic and finan-cial reports, supplementing the written reports that had been distributed 11/12/63prior to the meeting, copies of which have been placed in the filesof the Committee. Mr. Noyes commented on economic conditions asfollows:This morning I plan to review very briefly recent eco-nomic developments and then turn to a somewhat longer lookat trends in the economy that I hope will be helpful to youin evaluating the plethora of forecasts and projectionsthat will be forthcoming in the weeks ahead.Recent changes in employment, sales, and output can, Ithink, be fairly characterized as moderately favorable. Itnow appears that retail sales declined less from their sum-mer highs in September than had origirally been estimated,and that they more than recovered to a new high in October.We are presently estimating that the production indexmoved up fractionally--perhaps by enough to raise therounded index a point.Unemployment declined a tenth of a percentage point--from 5.6 per cent to 5.5--hardly a notable change in itself,but in the right direction. The new orders figures forSeptember were also revised upward, and now show almost a4-1/2 per cent increase over August.Total construction activity has been steady, at ahigh level, up about 5 per cent from a year ago.The flurry of price increases in the late summer andearly fall seems to have subsided in October. There werea few further advances, but also some offsetting declines.While prices will continue to bear close watching, it doesnot appear that an epidemic of upward price changes isunderway, and I would characterize the most recent develop-ments in this area as mildly reassuring.I will refer again to the McGraw-Hill survey in amoment, but the 4 per cent rise in over-all capital expen-diture plans for next year would suggest a moderatelyoptimistic current attitude on the part of the reportingbusinesses.This seems to me to add up to a generally favorablesituation--not showing for the moment either excessivelybullish or bearish tendencies.Let me turn now to a quick run through on some of theGNP figures that have been and will be very much in thenews. As a base, the third quarter of 1963 is now esti-mated at $588.5 billion. The fourth quarter looks like-20- 11/12/63$596 or $597 billion--give or take a few billion. Thismeans that the average for 1963 as a whole will be about$584 billion.Secretary Dillon joined the ranks of the prophetsearly by releasing two weeks ago projections for the firsttwo quarters of 1964, with and without a tax cut. Thesesuggest that in the second quarter the economy will bestumbling along at a rate of about $609 billion if thecut doess not receive early approval, but will zoom to$620 if it does.In the light of his long uphill struggle to obtainapproval of the tax bill, the Secretary may be regardedat a prejudiced witness--but his estimates are not toodifferent from those of many otter early birds in theforecasting game. The figures he used appear to beroughly consistent with those produced at a meeting ofacademic consultants to the Treasury last week andseveral other models that have been unveiled to the pub-lic gaze.On the present level of around $600 billion, five percent of GNP is, of course, about $30 billion. This yearthe increase has been at about that rate or a little better.A five per cent increase would mean an average for the yearof $615 billion and a fourth quarter of about $630 billion.Mary guesses now seem to be that the figures will runhigher than this with the stimulus of a tax cut--that theaverage will be in the low 620's--implying a fourth quar-ter somewhere in the high 630's or low 640's. If the taxcut should be completely rejected, a good many observersdoubt that upward momentum would be maintained--and thisproduces a much wider range--especially for the secondhalf of the year.It is interesting to note that all the models thatinclude a tax cut and assume that upward momentum willbe maintained involve a considerably higher rate ofbusiness investment than that suggested by the McGraw-Hill survey. For example, a "balanced" model designedto produce a $620 billion average for 1964 suggests anincrease in plant and equipment expenditures more in theneighborhood of 10 per cent than the 4 per cent reportedto McGraw-Hill. While inventory accumulation would besomewhat higher than in 1963, a "balanced" model cannotrely too heavily on this as a sustained stimulus. Hence,one must assume that either the impact of the tax cut ora generally favorable economic climate will cause busi-nessmen to revise their expenditure plans upward if we-21- 11/12/63are to achieve the levels of activity that seem to be widelyanticipated. The "favorable" projections for 1964 alsogenerally imply a large increase in consumption, with afurther rise in auto sales and some acvance in residentialconstruction activity. The critical question seems to bewhether the tax cut, if it comes, or some other exogenousforce will stimulate consumption enough, especially in thehard goods lines, to give rise to a major upward revisionin business investment plans.Mr. Brill made the following statement concerning money andcredit developments:Some commentators have described financial marketscurrently as confused and nervou., and this describes myown state of mind as well. I'm confused by a money marketin which a rebound of free reserves is accompanied by a 10or 12 point rise in bill rates to the highest levels in overthree years. I'm confused by a credit picture which hassome of the characteristics of economic boom, against ageneral economic background of only moderate expansion.I'm both confused and nervous about the squeeze on inter-est rate differentials, for even with a continuing largevolume of long-term saving, there appear increasing indi-cations that the most recent spurt in short-term rates iscarrying over into long-term markets as well.No single factor adequately brings all these dispar-ate developments into focus, but if there is anythingapproaching a universal explanation, it probably lies inthe course of monetary policy and private credit demandssince last spring. For some time, we have been congratu-lating ourselves because the tightening of the creditscrews seemed to be having its effects only on short-termrates, without any observable spillover to other financialmarkets cr to nonfinancial markets. New, however, thecumulative effects of reduction in reserve availability--on bank credit expansion, on bank liquidity positions, andon market expectations--are beginning to show some bite asthe economy generates somewhat more than seasonal steam inits credit demands.Statistically, the effect of the shift in policy lastspring is fairly striking. From December to May, totalreserves grew at an annual rate of 3 per cent, seasonallyadjusted. From May to October, growth in total reserves-22- 11/12/63has been at an annual rate of only six-tenths of 1 per cent,and this all in borrowed reserves. Nonborrowed reserves havedeclined.The slowdown in total reserve expansion so far has notlimited growth in the private money supply. In fact, pri-vate demand deposit expansion has accelerated. This is inlarge part a reflection of the change in the Government'scash position, however. The Treasury has been pulling downits deposits more than seasonally from the high levelsreached earlier in the year, with an exceptionally largedrop in October. We have been getting a switch in depositownership, but only a relatively small change in the rateof growth in total deposits.The effect of the tightening shows also in the composi-tion of bank credit. Expansion in total bank credit has beenat only a slightly slower pace in the five months since Maythan it was in the first five months of the year. Expansionin the earlier period, however, was accomplished with prac-tically no net liquidation of Governmert securities bycommercial banks. Since May, banks have had to liquidatealmost $4 billion in Governments to meEt rising privatecredit demands. At the end of September--the latest dataavailable--the ratio of bank holdings of short Governmentsto deposits was down to 7.2 per cent, compared with 7.8 percent in May and 9.5 per cent at the beginning of the year.With this background of increasing pressure on thebanking system, it is not surprising that a concentrationof Treasury short-term financing in late October should putbill rates under strong upward pressure. After switchingsome $4 billion out of the short-term end of the market inthe September refunding, the Treasury rebuilt the supplyof short-term instruments through a $1 billion strip onOctober 22, a $1 billion one-year bill on October 30, anda refunding on Octooer 28 of about $3-1/2 billion ofmaturing November issues into an 18-month note, some$400 million of which represented new money.Dealrs received substantial amounts of all of theseissues, and until the closing days of last week were mak-ing only slow headway in reducing their inventories. Inpart, their difficulties stemmed from bank competition,for bank sales of bills were adding to the market supplyat the same time that banks were competing aggressivelyfor corporate funds through CD's. Moreover, seasonalreserve patterns and dealer financing needs were suchas to limit the Desk's freedom to moderate market develop-ments through direct purchases for System Account.-23- 11/12/64Reflecting the various pressures, the bill rate pierced thediscount rate and stayed from 5 to 6 basis points over itthrough the weekly auction.Pressure is spreading to other maturities, with Treasurybond yields up 4 basis points since the last Committee meet-ing. It would seem that the cushion between short- and long-term rates has been compressed about as far as possible. Evenwith this recent rise in bond yields, the spread between longbonds and Treasury bills is down to 57 basis points, comparedwith 100 at the beginning of the year and in the May-Juneperiod. For investors, the gain from extending maturitiesnow is exceptionally small, relative to the prospectivecapital loss if there should be a readjustment in yieldrelationships anchored to the present level of bill rates.The market for State and local government securitiesis particularly vulnerable. Banks have been supplying about90 per cent of the funds going into municipals, and if thissupply should be curtailed because banks lack other sourcesto meet rising business loan demands, or because the squeezeon the b.ll rate-CD spread should cut the flow into timeaccounts, we could get a substantial reaction in Stateand local government yields. Municipal markets are ina technically weak position, with dealers' inventories ofunsold issues high, the yield spread vis-a-vis long-termGovernments exceptionally large, and prospects of a sub-stantial reduction in individual tax rates, particularlyin the upper brackets, limiting the enthusiasm of the mostimportant nonbank market for such issues.In my judgment, the domestic situation as reported byMr. Noyes does not suggest the need for or even the desir-abiLity of a further advance in the costs of financinginvestment, be it by State and local governments, businesses,or consumers. To avoid it now, however, after market expec-tations have been conditioned by recent developments, short-term rates probably would have to recede and re-establisha margin below the discount rate. This, in turn, probablywould require some slackening of the reins on reserves, sothat banks could meet more than just seasonal private creditdemands without having to liquidate Governments so heavily.In appraising reserve needs, it is also important to keepin mind that the switch in deposits from Government to pri-vate ownership probably has come to an end for this calen-dar year. In fact, our estimates are for a rise in theTreasury's balance to the end of the year, with a resultantdrain on reserves supporting private deposits. Unless the-24- 11/12/63basic economic situation changes substantially in the remain-ing weeks of the year, a more generous approach to reserveneeds than has prevailed recently would appear appropriate.Mr. Furth commented as follows on the balance of payments:The payments deficit for the quarter ending in Septem-ber seems to have been slightly Lower than estimated lasttime; it is now calculated at a seasonally adjusted annualrate of $2 billion, excluding the reflux of window-dressingfunds in July as well as all special transactions (prepay-ment of foreign debts and issue of nonmarketable Treasurybonds to foreign authorities). This rate is less than halfof the similarly adjusted average rate for the first twoquarters of the year.The improvement apparently was due in about equal partsto the decline in the outflow of long-term portfolio capitaland to a reversal in the movement of money-market funds, in-cluding a reflow from the Euro-dollar market. At firstglance, it would appear reasonable to attribute the reductionin the outflow of portfolio capital to the interest equiliza-tion tax proposal, and the reversal in the flow of money-market funds to the Federal Reserve actions lessening monetaryease. But it should be remembered that the outflow of bothportfolio capital and short-term funds, although very muchsmaller than in the second quarter or even the average ofthe first half, still was about as large as in the thirdquarter of 1962. It may therefore turn out that the im-provement contained a large seasonal element. Moreover,even if the improvement really was caused by the policyactions mentioned, it may reflect only a transitory initialshock reaction, which would not necessarily carry over tofuture periods.Reliable figures for October are not yet available;the tentative weekly data indicate a deficit larger thanthe monthly average for the third quarter, although prob-ably smaller than the average for the first half of theyear.Developments abroad show a mixed picture. Economicactivity in most foreign developed countries still is ex-panding although the OECD staff expects that growth inContinental Europe will slow down somewhat in the monthsto come. But Italy, France, and the Netherlands probablywill tighten domestic credit conditions, perhaps to anextent that could imperil further growth. If this happened,-25- 11/12/63U. S.. exports to those countries would be reduced whileoutflows of U. S. capital would be stimulated; the U. S.payments balance would thus be hit simultaneously on twofronts.Three weeks ago I commented on the cracks in the eco-nomic underpinning of those three European countries. To-day, Germany may be added to the list. The Stinnes bank-ruptcy, originally dismissed as an isolated incident, mayhave been more symptomatic than German reports wanted usto believe. Last week, rumors were prevalent about seriousdifficulties of an industrial concern of incomparablygreater importance than Stinnes, the Krupp family firm.While it has been forcefully denied that any insolvencywas impending, it appears that German heavy industry hasachieved its record exports, at least in part, at theexpense of adequate profit margirs; and moreover, thatGerman big business has again engaged in the traditionalCentral European practice of financing long-term invest-ments by means of short-term bank and acceptance credits.The German press is, somewhat belatedly, taking up theplea for expansion of German capital mrket facilities,including facilities for public share offerings.Needless to say, a financial breakdown of Germanheavy industry would be a serious blow to the economichealth of the free world at large, including that ofthe United States. It seems certain, therefore, thatany repetition of the 1929-31 disaster will be averted.But assuring that there will be no such disaster, thepresent situation could benefit the U. S. paymentsbalance in two ways. First, it could lead to a longoverdue reform of European banking and business financepractices and thus reduce European demands for U. S.long-term capital. Second, and more important, itcould show U. S. investors that, after all, investmentsat home, even if they do not promise the spectacularreturns that could be reaped abroad during the past10 or 15 years, may be built on a more solid basis.Chairman Martin called for the usual go-around of comments andviews on economic conditions and monetary policy, beginning with Mr.Hayes, who presented the following statement:-26- 11/12/63On the basis of the data available so far, it wouldappear that the expected October pick-up in domesticbusiness activity did occur, following the August sagand the rather uncertain September showing. The automo-bile industry is an outstanding element of strength, andrecent tendencies have been favorable in such key areasas retail sales, housing construction, plant and equip-ment spending, and corporate profits. Business sentimentseems to be considerably stronger than a few months ago,wish most forecasters seeing a continued expansion through1964. However, this optimism is based in part on tax cutexpectations, which are subject to considerable uncertain-ties, at least as to timing. Attempts to raise prices inrecent weeks have been themselves a reflection of betterbusiness sentiment; but, so far, price increases have notbeen sufficiently widespread to modify the general pictureof over--all price stability that has characterized recentyears. Stock prices remain close to their peak and do notseem to have been affected materially by the rise in mar-gir requirements.Recent credit statistics do not suggest any very sig-nificant changes. The fact that business loan demand hasbeen a good bit better than seasonal seems consistent withthe generally favorable business news. While the growthof total bank credit so far in 1963 has run somewhat behindthe comparable period of 1962, for many weeks now we haveseen required bank reserves running $100 to $200 millionahead of the Board staff guideline, with the excess lastweek even higher. Nonbank liquicity has kept up lastyear's substantial rate of gain and is surprisingly highin relation to gross national product for this stage ofa cyclical expansion.We can find a good many grounds for encouragement inthe sharply better third quarter balance of payments re-sults, particularly with respect to private capital exports,both long-term and short-term. The former have of coursebeen cut drastically by the interest equalization tax pro-posal. As for the short-term flow, there is a widevariety of items and perhaps a wide variety of causes forthe improvement; but the improvement was so great and sogeneral that it suggests the possibility of an appreciablecontribution from the lesser degree of ease in monetarypolicy. Preliminary October figures, however, indicatethat the deficit is still far from solved. I hope we canavoid this time the widespread tendency in this country tobecome overoptimistic when the balance of payments registersone good quarterly gain.-27- 11/12/63With the Treasury's November refunding virtually com-pleted and with no more important. Treasury financing insight for most of the remainder of the year, we would seemto be comparatively free to determine monetary policy with-out particular reference to Treasury financing schedules.Turning to policy, I believe a gold case can be madefor seeking a slightly slower rate of bank credit expan-sion over the coming months than has prevailed in the lastyear or so--always, of course, with due allowance forseasonal factors. I am led to this conclusion by recog-nition of the need for continued vigilance with respectto the balance of payments, the current signs of greaterstrength in the domestic economy, and the fact that re-cent rates of growth in bank credit, nnbank liquidityand required reserves would seem to leave room for someslight move toward lesser ease without appreciable risks.The degree of change I am thinking of is quite moderateand might be symbolized by a reduction in free reservesto a level averaging around zero. Short-term rates arelikely to take care of themselves pretty well in thenext few weeks, in the light of seasonal pressures,sizable dealer holdings, and general expectations thatbusiness will continue to move ahead fairly vigorously.While a 90-day bill rate a little above the discountrate may give rise to some gossip about a change in thelatter, I don't consider this a serious problem.For the moment a rise in the discount rate wouldappear decidedly premature. A wait-ana-see attitudeis clearly appropriate. Looking a little further ahead,however, I am troubled by the implications for us of thestrongly anti-inflationary credit policies that arebecoming increasingly prevalent on the European Conti-nent. These could ultimately build up considerable pres-sure for defensive measures on our part. Until recentlythe possible adverse effects of rising U. S. interestrates on the U. K. have been something of an inhibitingfactor in our own considerations. Lately, however, therehas been growing evidence of concern in the U. K. overthe danger of an "over-heated" internal business situa-tion. All of this suggests that a higher U. S. discountrate might have to receive serious consideration withinthe next few months.The directive should, I believe, be modified slightlyif the Committee decides, as I hope it will, that we shouldseek a slightly slower rate of growth in bank reserves andbank credit.-28- 11/12/63Finally, I should like to refer again in passing tothe fact that prevailing time deposit rates are very closeto bumping against the ceilings set by Regulation Q, sothat action in the near future to liberalize those ceil-ings would appear distinctly timely. The Board's recentaction in raising margin requirements was well timed andwell received. Perhaps a similar opportunity now presentsitself with respect to Regulation Q.Mr. Hayes added that he was skeptical that Europeans wouldactually avoid the use of monetary policy instruments to restraininflation.Mr. Shuford said the latest data available indicated thateconomic activity in the Eighth District had continued to improve,but, as in the rest of the nation, the rate of expansion had moder-ated somewhat since mid-year. Industrial use of electric power inthe major cities of the District, which increased markedly fromJanuary to July, had risen at a much lower rate since July. Totalemployment had remained unchanged since June, compared with a fourper cent annual rate of expansion during the January to June period.On the other hand, the volume of bank debits had continued to expandrapidly in the District. Total bank credit had risen more sharplysince June than in the rest of the nation. Total loans, especiallyto businesses, had increased substantially, and bank deposits hadalso risen since mid-year.Nationally, Mr. Shuford said, broad measures of economicactivity indicated some slowing down since July in the pace of ex-pansion. Industrial production, construction, and employment had all-29- 11/12/63 -30-been about the same since mid-year, and although personal income hadcontinued to move up, the rate of increase was lower.With respect to monetary experience, Mr. Shuford said thatrecent developments seemed to him to have been reasonably satisfactory,considering the continued business improvement and the Treasury'sfinancing activities. Strengthened interest rates and continued mone-tary expansion had been compatible.. The recent level of interest ratesprobably had been as high as was warranted by the international balanceof payments situation. On the other hand, the increase in bank reserves,bank credit, and money since mid-year did not appear to have beenunreasonable. Expansion in recent weeks had been unusually large, butthe same thing had happened at this season .n each of the last severalyears, ard might reflect a new seasonal pattern.As to policy, Mr. Shuford said he would favor no change; acontinuation of recent developments was in order. A three-monthTreasury bill rate of about 3.50 per cent seemed satisfactory tohim, and increases in reserves, credit, and money at about the ratesthat had prevailed since July seemed appropriate for the near future.He recognized the continuing need for alertness with respect to priceincreases and other evidences of excessive demand, although he saw nosuch evidences as yet.Mr. Shuford said that he would not recommend a change in thediscount rate at this time. He felt that the policy directive wassatisfactory, except for the reference to Treasury financing. 11/12/63Mr. Bcpp reported that information that had become availablesince the last meeting pointed to some deteriorating in Third Dis-trict business conditions. However, the evidence was mixed. Unem-ployment data were mildly encouraging in contrast to weakness shownby production and demand indicators. The weakness in demand probablyreflected in part the fine weather, which may have depressed depart-ment store sales.There was increasing pressure on reserve positions of Districtbanks during the past three weeks, Mr. Bopp said. Both the basic re-serve deficit of reserve city banks and borrowing at the discountwindow by country banks rose substantially during the first two weeksand then declined somewhat in the past week. At reporting banks,loans and investments and total deposits declined.In view of recent business and financial developments, a con-tinuation of present policy seemed appropriate, Mr. Bopp said. Busi-ness expansion continued at a moderate pace, despite the recent trendtoward a more optimistic appraisal of business prospects. The indexof wholesale prices remained stable, and there were still enough un-used resources to meet prospective increases in demand for theforeseeable future. With unused resources and only a modest rate ofexpansion in capital expenditures, a further rise in market rateswould be cause for concern. In his judgment the recent improvementin the balance of payments relieved some of the pressure for firmerrates.-31- 11/12/63The analysis that Mr. Hayes had given, Mr. Bopp continued,was one that had disturbed him since the beginning of the Committee'strend toward tighter monetary conditions. If European countriesmoved interest rates up and we felt forced to respond out of balanceof payments considerations, a serious problem could be posed for ourdomestic economy, which in turn could affect the entire world.Mr. Bopp concluded by saying that conditions called for noessential change in policy for the next three weeks. Reservesshould be supplied to meet seasonal needs and to prevent memberbank borrowing from rising much above the recent level. He feltthat the present directive was appropriate with the deletion of thereference to the Treasury financing, and would recommend no change inthe discount rate.Mr. Hickman said that, as Messrs. Noyes and Hayes had reportedthis morring, the pace of business activity was clearly quickening,and he had nothing significant to add to the story. He would, instead,like to report to the Committee the highlights of a meeting of 23Fourth District economists held recently at the Federal Reserve Bankof Cleveland.These economists, Mr. Hickman noted, were from major industrialconcerns in steel, autos, machinery, rubber, oil, etc., with headquar-ters or substantial operations in the Cleveland District. All of thebusiness economists, who had usually been on the very conservative-32- 11/12/63 -33-side, now emphasized the current strength of the economy, although theydiffered as to the durability of that strength. In view of the con-servatism of the group, he was impressed by the fact that three-fifthsof them forecasted continued expansion through next year, without anyspecific assumptions as to a tax cut.For the first time in several years, the Fourth District econo-mists included within the horizon of their outlook the possibility thatexpansion could become excessive, and hence unsustainable, in the near-future, Mr. Hickman reported. It was noteworthy that reference was madeto the possibility that the economy might "blow out at the top side,"although no consensus was reached. Much had been said about the changetowards firmness in the industrial price picture, and more price in-creases were believed to be ahead.It was generally felt that the steel industry this year wouldshow a total output of 108 million ingot tons or more, and a clearall-time record for steel consumption. An :.ngot output from 105million to 111 million tons was forecast for next year. For autos,it was believed that output at a rate of 7-1/4 million cars or bettercould be maintained during the first half of next year, with the ratedropping below 7 million in the second half. For the entire year 1964,the most frequent forecasts were 6.8 or 6.9 million cars domesticallyproduced, although the spectrum of estimates ranged from a low of 6.5million to a high of 7.5 million. 11/12/63Insofar as other industries were concerned, Mr. Hickman said,heavy machinery lines reported a marked shift in recent months fromdull to brisk orders. Numerous industries represented at the meetingindicated substantial gains in volume this year and further, althoughmore moderate, gains next year; these included aluminum, rubber, chem-icals, oil and food products. In the construction area, there appearedto be a general feeling that fears about overbuilding of apartments werenot well founded; the argument was that although overbuilding hadoccurred in ore or two large cities, the apartment boom was spreadingthrough medium-size and smaller cities of the country. Overbuildingof shopping centers, however, was a reality and retrenchment was theorder of the day. Representatives of the railroads were not happyabout the present arrangements for arbitration of the workrules dis-pute; they expected another strike threat in the late winter or earlyspring.Mr. Hickman said that the present state of economic activityand business sentiment, and the potential upward movement of the pricelevel, all lend support to a view that the System drift towards slight-ly less ease had been appropriate. The same inference could be drawnfrom international interest-rate relationships, which now appeared tobe in some sort of rough, although perhaps temporary, equilibrium.Until the price question was resolved he would favor a continuationof the present degree of firmness in the central money market. With-34- 11/12/63 -35-a more even distribution of reserves than in the past week or two,this would probably mean free reserves hovering around the zero level,Federal funds holding steady at 3-1/2 per cent, and a bill rate fluctu-ating narrowly around the discount rate.Well-informed bankers in the Fourth District had recently ex-pressed concern over the possibility that higher rates on certificatesof deposit might attract funds out of local banks into money marketcenters. Mr. Hickman felt this situation might be averted by appro-priate changes in Regulation Q, as Mr. Hayes had suggested at thismeeting and the last.Mr. Mitchell said that it seemed to him that the Committeehad slipped into a rather unproductive attitude toward the problemof appropriate monetary policy. For some time the alternatives hadbeen formulated as no change in policy or slightly greater firmness,and his side had been losing right along. While this had been goingon, the possibility of fiscal action had been receding. The tax billobviously was not going to be passed tnis year, and there was increas-ing question about next year. Even if the tax bill passed, there wasa good chance that Government expenditures would be held down to thepoint of nullifying the effect of tax reduction.According to the surveys, Mr. Mitchell said, no capital boomwas in prospect. The McGraw-Hill survey, which indicated a four percent increase in capital spending from 1963 to 1964, implied no 11/12/63 -36-increase over the level in the fourth quarter of 1963. In his opiniona further rise in capital spending was necessary at this stage of thecycle, and a higher level of new car sales than the forecasts Mr.Hickman had mentioned would be required if the consumer side was toprovide a stimulus.It was Mr. Mitchell's opinion that the Committee shouldseriously consider some easing. He thought it should be more accommo-dating of credit needs in the next 3 to 6 weeks; otherwise it would beflirting with the danger of a sharp rise in both long- and short-termrates, which would serve no purpose. It might be well to let the billrate drop a few basis points, partly to scotch rumors of an imminentdiscount rate increase. He did not urge any change in the directive,but favored a somewhat higher level of free reserves and a reductionin member bank borrowing to the neighborhood of $200-$300 million.Mr. Shepardson said that the aspect of the economy he foundencouraging was the fact that a boom was not underway. He would bemost concerned if there was a big surge in business activity; thegroundwork was already laid for expansion in wage rates, costs, andprices, and sone degree of continuing restraint was needed. In hisjudgment the policy the Committee had been following in recent weeksremained appropriate. He would not want to see any relaxation, al-though he recognized that there would be a seasonal need for reservesin the next few weeks and felt that these reserves should be supplied.He thought the recent rate of reserve expansion was a little more 11/12/63precipitous than desirable, and should be cut back. Along with Mr.Hickman and Mr. Hayes, he favored a somewhat lower level of free re-serves than during the last three weeks. He saw no need for a changein the directive except for deleting the Treasury financing reference.Mr. Robertson commented as follows:Business continues to expand, but seemingly without thekind of vigor that would assure a strong or ebullient surgecarrying over into 1964. There is encouragingly little ofthis expansion reflected as yet in the over-all price index-es, although these will bear watching. But there is discourag-ingly little reflection of the business rise yet in theunemploynent figures, and this argues strongly against anypremature tightening of monetary policy.Our balance of payments position has clearly becomebetter, even if for reasons that are rot fully explained.Meanwhile, on the financial side, we face some emergingproblems--partly of our own making.Bank loan expansion has been substantial, as has alsobeen money supply and time deposit growth. But in thetighter reserve situation that has prevailed since midyear,banks have been led to sell Governments and cut down onpurchases of municipals. If this bank reaction continuesor increases, it will not only slow down the growth of pri-vate liquidity but also very likely apply some furtherunsettling upward pressure on the capital markets gener-ally. I would not want to aggravate such movements atthis time.The bill rate is also a thorny problem right now. Byour own operations and increased Treasury auctions of newbills we have managed to push it so articifially high thatit is now embarrassing us. (As a matter of fact, at theclose Friday, November 8, 67 per cent of all bills out-standing were yielding more than the discount rate.)With the peak of seasonal pressures still ahead, we couldhave even higher bill rates on our hands between now andDecember 20. The potential consequences, as the commentsthis morning indicate, are uncomfortable to contemplate.They include the almost certain spread of rumors of afurther discount rate hike, with perhaps enough marketreaction to force the System's hand; pricing enoughsmaller banks out of the CD market to also demand another-37- 11/12/63increase in the Regulation Q ceilings; a spreading wave ofsympathetic rate adjustment through the longer term markets;and, just possibly, some corresponding upward adjustment inforeign official or market interest rates that would providean argument against letting our rates slide back down fromwhatever year-end seasonal peak they attained.The Treasury was quicker than we were to foresee someof these adverse consequences and to act to try to forestallthem. But how did it do so? By jumping into the market andbuying bills purely and simply with a rate objective in mind.Whatever else last Friday's operation accomplished, it demon-strated official pegging intentions for all to see. To besure, one could argue that this peg is more sophisticatedthan the old one; we do not maintain a fixed rate, but arange, with an upper and lower resistance point; and theCommittee had been wise enough to move that range occasion-ally. But the same old lesson still applies: you cannotpursue a rate target without giving up control of thevolume of reserves and, ultimately, of bank credit and money.It seems to me the basic question today is: how can weextricate ourselves? For many months I have been a minorityadvocate of not being so concerned with bill rate levels,but of concentrating rather on maintaining a stimulativereserve posture. But having assiduoisly devoted bothFederal Reserve and Treasury efforts to raising the three-month bill rate artificially high in the cluster of rates,we cannot now just turn our back on further bill ratechanges, focus on reserves only, and pretend no concernor responsibility for ensuing rate developments.Given the likely immediate consequences of such acourse, I think we have no real alternative but to conductour operations during the next few weeks of peak seasonalpressure in such a way as to minimize any excess of thethree-month bill rate over the discount rate. This I hopewe could accomplish by maintaining scmewhat greater reserveavailability, producing less bank borrowing and Federalfunds rates occasionally below 3-1/2 per cent. Thisshould be achieved by Desk efforts to purchase bills when-ever appropriate to this end, rather than either deliber-ately undertaking bill purchases just to drive rates downfrom new on. Hopefully, when seasonal pressures arereversed late in December, we should be able to concen-trate progressively more on the performance of the economyand its needs for funds and progressively less on the billrate alone. In the meantime, I hope steps are taken withthe view of prevailing upon the Treasury to undertake any-38- 11/12/63 -39-further bill rate "rigging" it has in mind by use of themore arms-length procedure of changing the size of billauctions, rather than repeating the injection of itselfinto the market, as its biggest buyer, as happened lastFriday.I believe the policy I have outlined could be con-strued as still falling within the bounds of the currentdirective. On the other hand, if a change in the direc-tive is regarded as desirable by the Committee, I wouldthink the most consistent alternative would be to adoptsomething like a mirror image of the directive adoptedlast January 8. Thus, the second paragraph could say:"To implement this policy, System openmarket operations during the next three weeksshall be conducted with a view to maintaininga reasonable degree of firmness in the moneymarket, while offsetting seasonal upwardpressures on short-term interest rates andproviding for moderate reserve expansion inthe banking system."Mr. Mills commented that Mr. Brill's statement offered factualevidence of the need for revision in the direction of System monetaryand credit policy. Accordingly, his remarks would focus on some recentdevelopments that were confirmed indirectly in Mr. Young's report tothe Commttee, that argued for a change in policy that should be possi-ble of accomplishment without damage to the present financial defensesset up to combat our adverse balance of payments difficulties. Hefound himself in substantial agreement with what Mr. Mitchell and Mr.Robertson had said. He was inclined to believe that when Federal Re-serve System history was written it would record that this period,provided a classic example of the lag in time before System policytakes hold, in this case a policy that threatened economic and financial 11/12/63harm. If such was the case, it was incumbent on the Committee tochange policy with the knowledge that the beneficial effects of thechange would not yield their impact for some time into the future.Mr. Mills then made the following statement:Surcease from the Federal Reserve System's enforcedwatch and ward kept over this nation's difficult balanceof payments situation seems to be an early prospect. Thatindications to that end emanate from press reports ofstatements made by important United States officials out-side of the Federal Reserve System does not lessen theirauthoritativeness. It is surprising, however, that thesepolicy statements on matters intimately related to theSystem's responsibilities are reported in the publicpress as intimating policy decisions already made in thelight of understandings reached by United States andforeign financial officials. Even though the backgroundto these statements, and implementation of the monetaryand credit policy that they portend, have not been dis-cussed by the recognized policy-making body in the fieldof monetary authority--namely, this Committee--the purportof these statements should be taken at face value as anopportunity to revise our policies along enlightened linesthat will give proper place to domestic economic considera-tions.The Secretary of the Treasury is reported to havesaid that higher interest rates are unnecessary forbalance of payments reasons. The November ninth editionof the New York Times carries a Paris report that theChairman of the Council of Economic Advisers has statedthat the principal European countries have agreed not toraise their interest rates in order to counteract higherinterest rates in the United States. The November eleventhedition of the New York Times, in a despatch from Brussels,also reports that an understanding has been reached thatEuropean financial authorities will not raise interestrates in their countries as an offset to higher interestrates in the United States.These various statements and reports seemingly givebelated recognition on the part of some United Statesofficials that the monetary and credit policy forced onthe Federal Reserve System for balance of payments reasonshas begun to produce what were inevitably undesirable-40- 11/12/63 -41-domestic economic reactions and should therefore be relaxed.By the same token, it is implicit from the financial climatethat was allowed to develop that the domestic viability ofthe counry should not be sacrificed to a needlessly restric-tive Federal Reserve System monetary and credit policy andthat henceforth any measures required to combat furtherbalance of payments difficulties should be taken in thearea of fiscal controls.In my opinion, a start should now be made toward in-creasing the supply of reserves available to the commercialbanking system so as to relieve some of the existing upwardpressure on interest rates and to reduce a very real threatto appropriate growth in the money supply.Mr. Mills added that he would favor adoption of the directiverevision suggested by Mr. Robertson.Mr. Wayne said that the generally favorable character ofFifth District business had changed little in recent weeks. Ratesof insured unemployment continued to decline seasonally and remainedwell below the national average. On the other hand, retail salesshowed less than seasonal strength, and dol.ar sales of flue-curedtobacco were 11 per cent lower than a year ago. Man-hours in non-durables were off in September despite good gains in all sectors ofthe textile industry. Current developments in textiles included wageincreases varying somewhat as to extent and timing but likely to beindustry-wide by the end of this month, a continuing slow trend towardhigher prices, and renewed consideration of a one-price cotton bill.Textile respondents in the Reserve Bank's latest survey reported rathergeneral increases in new orders and shipments but were pessimisticabout profits. Manufacturers of other nondurables, however, presented 11/12/63 -42-a generally neutral picture, while producers of durables indicatedfurther increases in both new orders and backlogs. In general, thesurvey showed business optimism continuing, although less pronouncedthan three and six weeks ago.On the national scene, Mr. Wayne said, it now seemed clearthat business activity was at a high level in October. Record highsin the production and sale of automobiles plus a near-record levelof new construction were major contributions toward a very good month.These were supplemented by small increases in steel production and bya continuing high level of employment. The strong recovery in retailsales indicated in the latest Department of Commerce estimates wasespecially encouraging to him. While these estimates were subject torevision, they provided fairly concrete evidence of growing strengthin an area which had thus far been about the weakest in the presentupsurge.Despite the October improvement, Mr Wayne continued, mostmajor components of business activity had shown quite modest ratesof increase over the past three or four months taken as a whole,with a few remaining about steady or declining slightly. In general,the level of activity had been high but there had been very few signsof a strong movement toward higher ground.As to policy, Mr. Wayne said he did not share the concern ofthose who feared that the supply of reserves was inadequate. There 11/12/63 -43-had been no adverse developments from the irternational side in thepast three weeks and perhaps some small improvement. Domestically,the increase in margin requirements should help to correct any ten-dency toward excesses which might exist in the financial area. Theincrease injected an element of uncertainty into the market which,together with other market forces, helped to push bill yields lastweek to their highest levels in more than three years, with most ofthem going significantly above the discount rate. Any further sub-stantial rise in short-term rates at this time would logically beinterpreted as evidence of a move toward a further restriction ofcredit, probably including an increase in the discount rate. Mr.Wayne did not believe that conditions at this stage required orjustified an increase in the discount rate. He therefore favoredcontinuation of the Committee's present policy, with the aim ofkeeping short-term rates within about the same range as had prevailedfor the past three weeks. He would renew the current directive withthe elimination of the reference to Treasury financing.Mr. Clay said that in his judgment the most significant pieceof current information about the state of the domestic economy wasthe McGraw-Hill report on business capital outlay plans. Little satis-faction could be gained from the projected increase for 1964 when notewas taken of its limited size and the fact that it indicated an annualrate of business capital outlays somewhat below that of the current 11/12/63 -44-quarter. Mr. Clay said that this evaluation was applicable even ifallowance was made for possible understatement, since the upwardrevision would need to be substantial if business capital outlayswere to provide the needed thrust to economic activity.Mr. Clay thought that continued expansion in total economicactivity in the months ahead rested upon advancing levels of demand andoutput and upon the resulting stimulus from these demands to capitalinvestment. An acceleration in capital investment was particularlyimportant at this advanced juncture of the business upswing, he felt.In view of the McGraw-Hill results, it was quite apparent that there wasneed for continued stimulus to over-all demand and encouragement tocapital investment. If the cyclically-sensitive sectors of demand andoutput simply held at the advanced levels of recent months, prospectsfor over-all expansion in the period ahead were seriously clouded.In view of the moderate pace of economic expansion in recentweeks, the continued problem of resource utilization, and the currentprojection of business capital outlays, the case for avoiding any re-duction in credit availability still stood, in Mr. Clay's opinion. Hethought that member bank reserves should continue to be supplied so asto provide for bank credit expansion and to avoid putting upward pressureon interest rates through monetary policy actions.Mr. Clay felt that the basic policy for the period ahead shouldbe the same as that determined at the preceding meeting of the Committee. 11/12/63 -45-Since that meeting, interest rates had moved upward without anymonetary policy intention of the Committee to produce that result.If continued reserve availability for credit expansion in the periodahead resulted in a lower Treasury bill rate, Mr. Clay said, thatdevelopment would be in keeping with this policy.Mr. Scanlon reported continuing evidence of gradual improve-ment of economic activity in the Seventh District. The ReserveBank's current survey of economists of major business firms andfinancial institutions in the District revealed widespread optimismconcerning economic prospects not only for the remainder of the yearbut for 1964 as well. Of the first 14 to respond only two expecteda decline in general business activity to begin before the middle ofnext year, assuming no tax cut. With a tax cut, all 14 expected anygeneral decline in business to be postponed at least until the secondhalf of 1964 and only 4 expected business to decline before the endof next year.A number of the respondents reported price increases for theitems purchased by their firms, but these increases thus far had beenconfined to a limited range of products. Inventories and employmentwere expected to rise somewhat in those firms during the next six months.A number of respondents indicated that their views on theprospects for the economy and for their own firr had become morefavorable during the past six months while none indicated that hisviews had become less optimistic. 11/12/63 -46-Data on capital goods orders for September, Mr. Scanlon said,confirmed the improvement reported by large District firms during thepast two months. The view that capital goods spending would be anexpansionary factor in 1964 was becoming increasingly widespread.Meanwhile, it had become common to anticipate a decline in auto salesof about one-half million units from the 7.6 to 7.7 million nowestimated for 1963. Auto sales, of course, continued excellent, andrecord production was scheduled for the remainder of the year.Employment had increased somewhat further during the autumn. inthe Seventh District and unemployment had continued to decline. InSeptember, all District States estimated their unemployment rates tobe well below the national average. Even Michigan estimated a rateof only 3.9 per cent compared with 4.8 per cent for the nation.Mr. Scanlon commented that reports of Seventh District banksshowed a relatively large contraction in credit during October,relatively greater than in the nation, reversing the very sharpexpansion in September. The recent decline reflected repayments bysecurities dealers and finance companies, but was due mainly toliquidation of Government securities, especially of longer maturities.Also, in the past two weeks holdings of municipals were down slightly.Business loans leveled off in the second half of October and gains forthat month were not very broadly based, with a considerable part ofthe.rise possibly related to commodity dealers' anticipations of 11/12/63 -47-higher prices. A large rise, mostly in one bank, was reported in themost recent week.The large Chicago banks had been experiencing increased reservepressures, Mr. Scanlon said, and had borrowed at the discount window,issued additional certificates of deposit, and sold Governmentsecurities. Like Mr. Brill, Mr. Scanlon was confused by some of theapparent conflicts in the bank credit picture.As to policy, Mr. Scanlon said he would favor maintaining thecurrent posture. With the short-term bill rate near the discount rateand banks tending to reduce holdings of long-term investments, he wouldbe hesitant to exert additional pressure that would result in a furtherincrease in bank borrowing at the discount window. He would maintaincurrent policy and observe developments for the next three weeks. TheCommittee might find at that time that it had little choice but toaccept further tightening. Reference to the Treasury financing shouldbe deleted from the directive, Mr. Scanlon said, and he would not favorchange in the discount rate now.Mr. Deming reported that "moderate expansion" continued todescribe current economic trends in the Ninth District. The Districtpersonal income estimate for September was slightly higher than inAugust and up four per cent from a year earlier. Department storesales were picking up after an unseasonably warm early October. Newcar sales and sales of farm machinery had been particularly good this 11/12/63 -48-fall and a big surge in the bank debit figures in both September andOctober also suggested high level spending at retail. Constructionactivity, on the whole, had been quite strong. Employment statisticsfor October showed only moderate improvement but unemployment ratescontinued below year-ago levels.Mr. Deming commented that the most significant recent develop-ment affecting prospects for the Ninth District economy was the Russianwheat purchase program. Very little, if any, of the District's springwheat might be involved in this deal; however actual and prospectiveexports of wheat, mostly from the hard winter wheat areas, had had asharp impact on all wheat prices. If 150 million bushels, or more, ofU. S. wheat actually were exported to Russia over the next severalmonths and wheat carryover was substantially reduced, wheat priceswere likely to continue firm against the practical ceiling set by theCommodity Credit Corporation in their formula for releasing wheat stocksfor purchase. Without this expanded demand and with lower supportprices in prospect for 1964 production, Mr. Deming said, wheat pricesmight have been expected to decline to minimum support levels. In short,the Russian deal could make a multi-million dollar difference in farmincome figures for the Ninth District over the balance of this cropyear and into the new crop year. Wheat was especially important tothe Ninth District since it brought in more than 10 per cent of Districtcash farm income and about 40 per cent of farm income in North Dakota. 11/12/63 -49-Bank credit in the District, Mr. Deming said, was currentlyexpanding about in line with seasonal expectations, anddeposits wereshowing a larger than seasonal improvement. At the weekly reportingbanks, total bank investments declined seasonally during October withloans holding about even. Both loans and investments advanced at morethan normal seasonal rates at the country reporting banks.Some reserve pressure had been evident at the Ninth District'slarger banks during most of October, but more recently the situationhad eased. As of the Friday preceding this meeting, only four bankswere borrowing at the Minneapolis Reserve Bank, and six were borrowingat Helena. District banks continued as net purchasers of Federal fundsbut total purchases declined somewhat in late October and early November,With respect to policy, Mr. Deming said he would favor essen-tially no change. He would pretty well discard the bill rate as apolicy guide and focus instead on reserves and reserve availability.He was a little disturbed by the recent run-up in the bill rate,particularly after hearing Mr. Young's report. For the next threeweeks, sufficient reserves should be provided to meet normal seasonalexpansion in bank credit, but no more. He would not try to recapturethe reserves already added to meet what seemed to have been a largerthan normal seasonal deposit growth. In other words, he would startfrom the present base of actual required reserves and supply reservespretty much in keeping with the needs outlined in the Board staff's 11/12/63 -50-reserve projections. This would mean that the Desk would injectapproximately $200 million of reserves over the next three weeks.From then until the end of the year, there should be just about aneven balance so far as reserve "put and take" was concerned. If therewas more than a seasonal demand for credit over the balance of the year,this would be reflected in a somewhat lower level of free reserves. Hewould not take any positive action to try to push the level of freereserves down or the bill rate up, but instead would let market forcesreflect themselves. He recognized the difficulty of such an assignmentfor the Desk and the element of judgment that was involved. But underthis policy there might be little appreciable impact on rates duringthe period until the end of the year.Mr. Deming said he was not sure that a change in the directivewas necessary, but if one were to be made he would revise the secondparagraph to call for operations "with a view to meeting seasonalneeds for bank reserves."Mr. Swan reported that the limited amount of information fcrthe Twelfth District that had become available since the precedingmeeting indicated no marked changes. Business activity seemed to becontinuing to rise moderately and business sentiment was optimistic,although there seemed to be some concern about the timing and ultimatefate of the tax bill. For the three weeks ending October 30, Districtweekly reporting banks experienced a somewhat smaller increase in 11/12/63 -51-total loans and investments than did reporting banks in the nation asa whole. The loan increase was about the same as nationally, but thedecrease in Government security holdings was somewhat greater. Thelarger banks in the District were still net sellers of Federal funds.As to policy, Mr. Swan said it seemed to him that the backgroundwas still one of moderate business expansion, with little indication ofany real upsurge. On the other hand, the balance of payments positionwas improved. He was impressed by several things. First, some of therecent growth in private deposits had resulted from a substantial dropin Treasury balances, and the decline in the latter presumably was overfor the rest of the year. Secondly, in addition to the effects ofimproved business conditions, the money and capital markets had beeninfluenced by somewhat special circumstances--a substantial volume ofTreasury bill issues and a very heavy volume of corporate and municipalissues. Finally, general uncertainty with regard to the course ofmonetary policy had been engendered by the rise in the bill rate. Itseemed to Mr. Swan that, insofar as possible, the Committee ought toprovide a breathing spell, and try to assess the strength of marketforces. The Committee could continue its present policy for the nextfew weeks--by which he would mean offsetting any upward rate pressuresfrom seasonal forces--and see what happened. If as a result thereshould be a decline in the bill rate, Mr. Swan would make no attemptto offset it. It would seem that under this policy member bank 11/12/63 -52-borrowing could be kept somewhat below $400 million. He would resolvedoubts on the side of ease rather than, as he thought had been done inrecent weeks, on the other side. He would not change the directiveexcept to delete the reference to Treasury financing, although hehad some sympathy for Mr. Robertson's suggestion.Mr. Irons reported that conditions in the Eleventh Districtwere generally favorable, although mixed. The drought was affectingwide parts of the District, especially the coastal areas. This wasacting adversely on some kinds of agriculture, particularly theconditions of the ranges.The industrial production index for the District had set a newrecord nigh, Mr. Irons said, rising several points in the past fewmonths. Nonagricultural employment had moved up one per cent and hadbeen rather firm over the District. Construction contract awards inthe latest month were down somewhat but for the first nine months ofthis year were nine per cent above the equivalent period last year.Crude oil production in the District showed no change, and retailtrade had been quite high relative to a year ago. Trade in Octoberwas lower than in September, but seemed to be picking up in the mostrecent week or two.At District commercial banks, Mr. irons continued, total loansand investments had declined recently. This was due mainly to a decline 11/12/63 -53-in holdings of Treasury bills; the loan decline had been slight.Banks were not borrowing at the discount window in very large amounts,although borrowings were somewhat higher than they had been for thepast three weeks. Purchases of Federal funds by District banks hadbeen high. As had been the case for several months, these purchaseswere concentrated largely at two banks, although two or three otherbanks had bought funds in sizable amounts.Mr. Irons said he would leave the cirective unchanged andcontinue policy as it has been carried out during the past three weeks.He would favor neither additional finning nor greater ease at thistime. He was somewhat disturbed by the run-up in the Treasury billrate to 3.56 per cent because of resulting rumors in the press and inthe market. He hoped the Committee could avoid a repetition of theJune-July situation, when it was faced with widespread anticipation ofdiscount rate action because the bill rate was so far above the discountrate; he did not think the discount rate should be changed at this time.He thought the Committee should concentrate its attention on reserveavailability, meeting seasonal requirements and holding at that level.He did not know whether or not the bill rate could be ignored; if itrose, the Committee might have to react. It was his hope that withsome of the recent pressures removed the bill rate would tend tofluctuate around the 3.50 discount rate.Mr. Ellis n.ted that a Western Massachusetts mutual savingsbank was now advertising the highest rate on savings deposits of any 11/12/63 -54-of the nation--five per cent on one-year deposits. Mortgage money inthe area was available at 5-1/2 per cent, and he thought the bank wouldfind it difficult to operate with that margin. Other savings bankswere showing no disposition to follow suit. One New Hampshirecommercial bank reported it was having difficulty meeting competitionon time certificates of deposit as rates moved up, and was urgingrelief from the present Regulation Q limits. Other banks were concernedabout the same problem.Mr. Ellis said that there had been no significant changes inthe general economic situation of the First District recently. On thebasis of year-to-year comparisons, financial data showed strength,production was about unchanged, and the employment situation showedweakness.The Boston Reserve Bank had just held a semi-annual meeting ofDistrict economists, Mr. Ellis said, and found them optimistic. Themedian of their estimates for GNP in the second quarter of 1964 was$610 billion. Particularly notable was the. fact that the range betweenthe hignest and lowest projections was the smallest in the 12 yearssince these conferences were started. Question was raised as towhether a tax bill could be passed if business continued good in theearly part of next year.Turning to monetary policy, Mr. Ellis noted that for some timethe Committee had wanted to improve balance of payments conditions by 11/12/63 -55-affecting short-term outflows, and the staff reports at this meetingshowed that some improvement had beer accomplished. One might arguethat in light of the improvement the Committee should rest on itsoars. But Mr. Ellis recalled the argument that the Committee wasnot using monetary policy sufficiently for balance of paymentsobjectives. For his part, he had no conviction that any permanentimprovement had been achieved. He also lacked confidence that theEuropeans wculd renounce monetary policy in dealing with their currentproblems.Domestically, Mr. Ellis noted, business loan expansion inSeptember and October had been greater that seasonal. The moneysupply, seasonally adjusted, was rising sharply, and despite theCommittee's July shift to a policy of less ease, required reservesagainst private deposits were expanding well above the 3 per centguideline. This growth was real, even if it reflected a shift fromreserves held against Treasury deposits. Mr. Ellis said he feltnervous about the degree of liquidity that had been built up underthe policy the Committee had followed this year. He also noted thateven with free reserves exceeding $100 million inthe last few weeks,Treasury financing activities combined with market influences hadmoved short-term rates up.Mr. Ellis said he could agree with those who advocated meetingseasonal needs for reserves and letting market factors work. It was 11/12/63 -56-his guess that this would mean some further rise in bill rates. Thealternative would be to hold short rates down by supplying additionalreserves. He would prefer to concentrate cn reserve availability--meeting seasonal needs, but anticipating that actual credit demandswould exceed their normal seasonal levels. As targets he would suggestfree reserves in the range $0-50 million, and bill rates fluctuatingnear present levels, above the discount rate. Mr. Ellis concluded bysaying he did not favor a change in the discount rate at this time.Mr. Balderston said that like Mr. Brill and others he wasconfused by recent developments. He felt that he understood what washappening to the bill rate; it had been increased by recent Treasuryfinancing operations. He noted that, normally, at this time of theyear the Committee felt it must take care of seasonal needs, and hehad started with the assumption that this year seasonal needs could beaccommodated without too much attention to bill rate fluctuations. Atthe next stage in his reasoning he concluded that enough reservesshould be supplied to meet seasonal needs. He then began to considerwhat lay ahead of the Committee next year, both internationally anddomestically. In the international area, he believed that Europeannations would protect themselves against uncontrolled inflation,regardless of recent assurances that they would avoid the use ofmonetary policy; no promises of this type would stand up in countrieswith memories of hyper-inflation. Domestically, there were three 11/12/63factors he thought relevant to the outlook. First, he had been toldthat the Presidential appointees would not succeed in solving theproblem of railroad featherbedding. Secondly, he noted that Hoffawas already announcing his plans for the year ahead. Third, theautomobile industry had wage negotiations scheduled for August 1964.Mr. Balderston said he had looked back to some remarks he hadmade to the Committee six months ago to see if he could find any guidesfor himself. He then presented the following statement:Six months ago I spoke of my concern about two questions:(1) that an appropriate economic policy for the nation calledfor "holding the line" on costs and prices;(2) that monetary policy should contribute to liquidity ade-quate for the economy's transactions but not so great as tolead to:(a) leakage of funds to other countries;(b) speculative excesses;(c) imprudent decision-making by borrowers and lenders.It is still my belief that a "hold-the-line" policy oncosts and prices is of fundamental importance, both in achiev-ing equilibrium in our balance of payments, and in creatingjob opportunities at home.As to the second policy question, how much liquidity isappropriate right now, I suggested certain benchmarks to dis-tinguish between enough to nourish the economy and too much.I indicated that, as of last May, I would favor a policy ofsomewhat less ease and a probing acticn to discover its im-pact. As an aid to this determination, I then suggested thatthis Committee watch the following indicators:(1) The relation of short-term rates here and abroad.(2) The total required reserves supporting private deposits.Last May I favored an increase in such reserves at a rate lessthan 3 per cent annually, but with a lower limit that wouldstill permit some further expansion in private demand deposits.(3) The expansion of bank earning assets in relation to legiti-mate loan demand. In short, I favored a rate of increase ofbank acquisitions of savings plus the creation of bank creditto permit money-supply growth in keeping with the transactionsneeds of the economy without inducing the granting of unsoundcredit.-57- 11/12/63As to the first of my tests, the bill rate and Federalfunds rate are both at about the discount rate and, in addi-tion, approximate the covered short-term rates of Englandand Canada. The outflow of short-term capital has diminished,temporarily at least. A further rise to a point that wouldinduce an inflow of short-term funds to this country mightforce England and Canada to raise their own rates. Moreover,if our bill rate rises too near the going rate on negotiableCDs, the exodus of large amounts of time deposits from thecommercial banks would lessen their willingness to absorbmunicipal bonds.The second of my tests has to do with the growth inreserves. In May, I suggested cutting back the rate at whichthose behind total private deposits had been growing, namely3.2 per cent. In fact this rate has increased even fasterat an annual rate of over 4.5 per cent. This has permittedrequired reserves behind demand deposits to grow at an annualrate of close to 3 per cent. Both my upper and lower limitsfor reserve growth reveal an increase above what I favoredlast May. The outcome is more liquidity than seems desirable.Although Fall seasonal demands for bank credit and thecurrent upward pressure upon bill rates might preclude animmediate dampening of this high rate of liquidity creation,the passage of the seasonal need for funds will permit itscorrection.My third test has to do with bank-credit availability.In contrast to the reserve test, bank credit expansion doesappear to have moderated. To meet loan demand, banks have,since May, liquidated $3.7 billion (seasonally adjusted) ofgovernment securities. On the other hand, credit availabilityhas not been reduced to the point where discountings areheavy, or where banks are becoming noticeably more selectivein the quality of their lending. Therefore, this third testalso suggests that this Committee might appropriately reducereserve availability when seasonal pressures permit.Mr. Balderston concluded by saying that, in the meantime, he wouldfavor continuing the policy of the past three weeks.Chairman Martin said that he felt more comfortable about monetarypolicy at present than he had for a long time. Unlike Mr. Mills, hethought history would say that at this juncture the System had made a-58- 11/12/63 -59-commendable contribution to a difficult problem. With the Thanksgiv-ing holiday approaching, he considered the present a poor time to makesmall changes in money market conditions, and he noted that thediscussion had been concerned with only minor changes in one directionor the other. He could not agree with charges of rigging or pegging,although it could be said that the Committee was always engaged inpegging to some extent by the very nature of its operations. Hedoubted that the Committee had too much influence on some of thesethings.At the moment, Chairman Martin continued, he thought everythingwas going in the Committee's favor. He was more optimistic than someof the peopl, around the table about business. Activity was expanding,and the volume of unutilized plant capacity that could pay its waywas getting very small. He also was more apprehensive than somepeople 'about prices. While he did not attach great importance toincidental cases of mark-ups, about some of which he had heard recently,this was the way an inflationary progress began. He thought the priceindexes always tended to lag behind actual price changes; inflationcould be unnoticed for a period and then suddenly become evident inthe indexes.The unemployment statistics did not indicate adequate responseto the stimuli that were being applied, Chairman Martin said, but hethought he could detect some improvement in the situation. For example, 11/12/63 -60-in many areas casual labor was now being picked up, unlike a fewmonths ago.With respect to international developments, U. S. exportswere at a high level, and there was less pressure on investors toput funds abroad.In sum, Chairman Martin said, he thought things were goingthe Committee's way at the moment, and he would hesitate to see theCommittee press its luck too far. Ic was his personal view that nochange should be made in policy and that the directive should bemodified only by deleting the Treasury financing reference. Theremight be difficult problems in the money market over the Thanksgivingholiday and he would want to observe developments for another threeweeks before deciding whether to move in either direction. For thefirst time in a long while, he thought the Committee might soon finditself faced with the possibility of serious problems with prices andwith an incipient expansion at an unsustainable rate. He hoped theCommittee would not reverse a policy which he felt had, by and large,been successful. He would reiterate a view he had expressed before:the recent lessening of ease had helped both the domestic businesssituation and the balance of payments. He thought there was noparticular reason to be discouraged at the moment nor to lean onmonetary policy as a stimulus or a crutch. 11/12/63The Chairman then proposed that the Committee vote on a policydirective identical to the one issued at the previous meeting exceptfor deletion of the reference to Treasury financing.Thereupon, on motion duly made andseconded, the Federal Reserve Bank of NewYork was authorized and directed, untilotherwise directed by the Committee, toexecute transactions in the System Accountin accordance with the following currenteconomic policy directive:It is the Federal Open Market Committee's current policyto accommodate moderate growth in bank credit, while maintain-ing conditions in the money market that would contribute tocontinued improvement in the capital account of the U. S.balance of payments. This policy takes into consideration thefact that domestic economic activity is expanding further,although with a margin of underutilized resources; and thefact that the balance of payments position is still adversedespite a tendency to reduced deficit. It also recognizes theincreases in bank credit, money supply, and the reserve baseof recent months.To implement this policy, System open market operationsshall be conducted with a view to maintaining the degree offirmness in the money market that has prevailed in recentweeks, while accommodating moderate expansion in aggregatebank reserves.Votes for this action, Messrs. Martin,Hayes, Balderston, Bopp, Clay, Irons, Mitchell,Robertson, Scanlon, and Shepardson. Voteagainst this action: Mr. Mills.Mr. Hayes commented that his vote in favor of this actionmight appear inconsistent with the views he had expressed earlier.He had modified his position, he said, because he had been impressedby the arguments at the meeting in favor of adopting a wait-and-see-61- 11/12/63 -62-attitude. He agreed with Mr. Scanlon that after another three weeksthe Committee might find it necessary to change its policy. He alsofelt there was some misapprehension at the meeting on the position ofEuropean governments with respect to their use of monetary policy. Hethought the Europeans would be influenced principally by their ownsituations, and not so much by what this country did. Moreover, hethought it incorrect to say that there was a complete parallelism ofinterest between the Europeans and this country with respect to upwardmovements of interest rates, since our balance of payments with Europewas still sharply adverse.Mr. Robertson said he had voted in favor of the directiveadopted because he thought the language was adequate to encompass hisviews. He e.pressed some doubt, however, that the directive would beconstrued consistently with his thinking.Chairman Martin asked whether there was any objection to theearlier suggestion by Mr. Stone for revising the continuing authoritydirective to direct the New York Bank not to exceed $1 billion in thechange in the aggregate amount of U. S. Government securities held inthe System Open Market Account during any period between meetings ofthe Committee, and no objection was expressed.Thereupon, upon motion duly made andseconded, and by unanimous vote, section1(a) of the continuing authority directiveto the Federal Reserve Bank of New York wasamended to read as follows: 11/12/63 -63-To buy or sell United States Government securities inthe open market, from or to Government securities dealersand foreign and international accounts maintained at theFederal Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, regular, ordeferred delivery basis, for the System Open Market Accountat market prices and, for such Account, to exchange maturingUnited States Government securities with the Treasury orallow them to mature without replacement; provided thatthe aggregate amount of such securities held in such Account(including forward commitments, but no including suchspecial short-term certificates of indebtedness as may bepurchased from the Treasury under paragraph 2 hereof) shallnot be increased or decreased by more than $1 billion duringany period between meetings of the Committee.Chairman Martin suggested that the item on the agenda pertainingto the question of making available minutes of the Federal Open MarketCommittee for some past period for use of scholars and others onceagain be held over until the next meeting, and there was no objection.Chairman Martin then referred to the tentative schedule ofmeetings of the Federal Open Market Committee for the remainder of 1963and for 1964 that had been distributed at the previous meeting, andasked for comments. Mr. Hayes observed that from time to time he hadexpressed doubts about the need for the Committee to meet as often asevery three weeks on a regular basis. The Chairman replied that thequestion of the frequency of meetings could, of course, be raised atany time, but he thought it useful for the members to have some ideaof the schedule of meetings to expect during the coming year. Noobjections were raised to the schedule that had been distributed. Acopy of this schedule has been placed in the files of the Committee. 11/12/63 -64-It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open MarketCommittee would be held on December 3, 1963.Mr. Hayes then summarized for the Committee the status of aTreasury Department program intended to revise and improve statisticalreporting on foreign loans by major U. S. tanks.Thereupon the meeting adjourned.Secretary