 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Systemin Washington cn Tuesday, September 10, 1963, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Martin, ChairmanHayes, Vice ChairmanBalderstonClayIronsKingMitchellRobertsonScanlonShepardsonWayne, Alternate for Mr. BoppMessrs. Hickman, Shuford, and Swan, Alternate Membersof the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Ellis and Deming, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Boston and Minneapolis,respectivelyMr. Young, SecretaryMr. Sherman, Assistant SecretaryMr. Kenyon, Assistant SecretaryMr. Hackley, General CounselMessrs. Baughman, Brill, Eastburn, Furth, Garvy,Green, Holland, Koch, and Tow, AssociateEconomistsMr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open MarketAccountMr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board ofGovernorsMr. Yager, Chief, Government Finance Section,Division of Research and Statistics, Board ofGovernorsMr. Broida, Chief, Consumer Credit and FinancesSection, Division of Research and Statistics,Board of GovernorsMr. Spencer, General Assistant, Office of theSecretary, Board of Governors 9/10/63Messrs. Hilkert and Patterson, First VicePresidents of the Federal Reserve Banks ofPhiladelphia and Atlanta, respectivelyMessrs. Mann, Ratchford, Taylor, Jones, Parsons,and Grove, Vice Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta,St.. Louis, Minneapolis, and San Francisco,respectivelyMr. Marsh, Assistant Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of New YorkMr. Anderson, Financial Economist, Federal ReserveBank of BostonMr. Sternlight, Manager, Securities Department,Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkUpon motion duly made and seconded,and by unanimous vote, the minutes of themeeting of the Federal Open Market Com-mittee held on July 30, 1963, were approved.Before this meeting there had been distributed to the Committeea report from the Special Manager of the System Open Market Account onforeign exchange market conditions and on Open Market Account andTreasury operations in foreign currencies for the period August 20through September 4, 1963, together with a supplementary report coveringthe period September 5 through 9, 1963. Copies of these reports havebeen placed in the files of the Committee.In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs observedthat the U. S. gold stock would remain unchanged this week. There was asufficient balance in the Treasury Stabilizazion Fund to take care ofimmediate foreseeable needs, and he was hopeful that it might be possibleto get through the remainder of this month without showing further lossesin the gold stock.-2- 9/10/63 -3-In the London gold market, a certain amount of speculative buyinghad developed during the last few days of August, resulting in depletionof the gold pool. The proposed interest equalization tax was a disturbinginfluence, along with the recent Brookings study recommending flexibleexchange rates. There were also the usual rumors in advance of the annualmeetings of the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank.The gold market developments began to worry some Western European bankers,but the Russiars then came in with sizable gold sales and the gold poolwas able to acquire a substantial part of those sales.The U. S. dollar had shown a mixed pattern in the foreign exchangemarkets, being firm against sterling, the Canadian dollar, the guilder,and the lira, but weak against the French franc, the Swiss franc and themark. The total flow of dollars to Germany and Switzerland had not beensizable in recent weeks, however, and there had been a noticeable declinein the intake of dollars by the Bank of France. In summary, there hadbeen a gradual improvement in the over-all position of the dollar. Amajor factor appeared to be the proposed interest equalization tax,which was placing a virtual freeze on new foreign flotations in theU. S. market. However, the recent improvement in the balance of pay-ments figures was mainly at the expense of Canada and Japan. The longerrun consequences of the tax were difficult to estimate, but Mr. Coombswas inclined to feel that they might be much less than the short-runinfluence. 9/10/63 -4-There were also a number of indications that the recent rise inU. S. short-term interest rates was beginning to encourage a repatriationof U. S. corporate funds previously placed. in the Euro-dollar market.The situation appeared to be at a point where even a moderate easingabroad, coupled with a firm short-term interest rate structure in thiscountry, would bring about a substantial inflow of short-term funds.In reply to a question about the effect of the interest equaliza-tion tax in light of the proposed exemption of Canadian issues, Mr. Coombssaid that until the tax was actually passed, no one was prepared to takea Canadian issue for fear the Congress might not approve the exemption.The same thing applied in the case of Japan. In the short run, the pro-posed tax would exert a substantial effect on the balance of paymentsstatistics, like the virtual freeze on the flow of short-term funds toCanada in the first part of 1962.Thereupon, upon motion duly made andseconded, and by unanimous vote, the SystemOpen Market Account transactions in foreigncurrencies during the period August 20 throughSeptember 9, 1963, were approved, ratified,and confirmed.Turning to recommendations for consideration by the Committee,Mr. Coombs pointed out that the $250 million reciprocal currency agree-ment with the Bank of Canada, currently on a standby basis, would matureSeptember 26, 1963. He recommended its renewal for a period of threemonths. 9/10/63In discussion, which centered around the relatively large sieof the Canadian arrangement, Mr. Coombs brought out that Canada was themost important trading partner of the United States. He felt that therelationship of the British and Canadian swap arrangements ($500 millionand $250 million) was about right. In relation to the British swaparrangement, the swap agreements with two or three of the Continentalcentral banks were probably on the low side, and in due course it mightbe desirable to attempt to work out somewhat larger swap lines in thesecases.Thereupon, the renewal of the reciprocalcurrency agreement with the Bank of Canada, asrecommended by Mr. Coombs, was approved unan-imously.Mr. Coombs noted that three drawings of $25 million each underthe swap arrangement with the German Federal Bank would mature September18, September 20, and September 23, 1963, respectively. It appeared thatduring September there might be rather substantial payments by the GermanGovernment to the United States for military hardware. If the remainderof the payments balance between the two countries was roughly in equi-librium, it might be possible to pay off the swap drawings by buyingmarks against the dollars used by the German Government and by buyingthe necessary additional marks through the market. If developments didnot unfold in this way, however, he would recommend renewing the swapdrawings for three months. In each case, this would be the first renewalof the drawing.-5- 9/10/63 -6-The renewal of the three swap drawings,if necessary, was noted without objection.Proceeding to his third recommendation, Mr. Coombs notedthat the $12.5 million System drawing of French francs under the swapline with the Bank of France had been completely covered by equivalentpurchases of French francs forward. Thus the swap drawing would berepaid by around the end of October. The forward purchases were madeunder the $25 million authorization for forard purchases of foreigncurrencies that: was given by the Committee on March 5, 1963. Mr. Coombsfelt that this had been a useful operation and that it would be desirableto provide room to take care of other similar opportunities that mightappear. He recommended, therefore, that the authorization for forwardpurchases of foreign currencies be increased from $25 million to $50 million.In reply to questions, Mr. Coombs stated that it would be theintent, if the increased continuing authorization were granted, to acquirefrom time to time currencies in which the System had a short positionas the result of drawings under swap lines. At the moment, only theGerman and French swap drawings were outstanding, but in the futurethere might be other drawings where forward purchases would be usefulin arranging for repayment. This seemed a businesslike way of takingcare of debts incurred. In the French case, before the due date of thedrawing, the possibility arose of buying francs forward at a discount,and in this manner the drawing was completely covered. The Committee'sGuidelines, he pointed out, specify that forward purchases should be 9/10/63 -7-cleared in advance, and this had been done. He did not think that for-ward purchases in such circumstances could be regarded as an unwarrantedmanipulation of normal market processes. Instead, it amounted toanticipating the repayment of drawings by buying forward rather thanwaiting to buy spot. If the needed currency was available at a discount,its purchase forward would seem to be a businesslike way of handling therepayment of a drawing.Mr. Mitchell commented that he thought several members of theCommittee felt some concern as to whether System foreign exchangeoperations might tend to obscure normal market forces. He found him-self trying to evaluate the extent to which System operations mighttend to obscure fundamental adjustments in the process of taking placein the market.Mr. Coombs said that he could understand this concern. Therewas clearly the potential in System foreign exchange operations of doingwhat had been suggested. However, in view of the way that Systemoperations had been conducted, he thought that this had not been thecase. Whenever the System had run into great pressure, it had yieldedto the pressure and backed away; in no instance had an attempt beenmade to dig in and maintain an artificial rate. As to forward opera-tions, he felt that the risk of distorting market forces was less thanin the case of spot operations. There was admittedly a real risk in thewhole area of System operations of obscuring basic market forces. On the 9/10/63other hand, the System had drawn under its swap lines only on occasionswhen it appeared that existing flows of funds might be reversible.Thereupon, upon motion duly made andseconded, and by unanimous vote, the con-tinuing authority directive for Systemforeign currency operations was amended,effective immediately, to read as follows:The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is authorized anddirected to purchase and sell through spot transactions anyor all of the following currencies in accordance with theGuidelines on System Foreign Currency Operations reaffirmedby the Federal Open Market Committee on March 5, 1963, asamended on May 28, 1963:Pounds sterlingFrench francsGerman marksItalian lireNetherlands guildersSwiss francsBelgian francsCanadian dollarsAustrian schillingsSwedish kronorThe Federal Reserve Bank of New York is also authorizedand directed to purchase, in accordance with the Guidelines andfor the purpose of allowing greater flexibility in coveringcommitments under reciprocal currency agreements, any or allof the foregoing currencies through forward transactions, upto a combined total of $50 million equivalent.The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is further authorizedand directed to purchase and sell, in accordance with theGuidelines and for the purpose of utilizing its holdings of onecurrency for the settlement of commitments denominated in othercurrencies, any or all of the foregoing currencies through for-ward as well as spot transactions. up to a combined total of $50million equivalent.Total foreign currencies held at any one time shall notexceed $1.75 billion. 9/10/63-9-Before this meeting there had been distributed to the membersof the Committee a report covering open market operations in U. S.Government securities and bankers' acceptances for the period August 20through September 4, 1963, and a supplementary report covering theperiod September 5 through September 9, 1963. Copies of these reportshave been placed in the files of the Committee.In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Marsh commentedas follows:During the past three weeks we were able to maintainabout the same degree of firmness in the money market as inthe previous period while supplying reserves to meet normalmonthly drains and Labor Day needs without creating downwardpressures on short-term rates. In fact, due to a combinationof fortuitous circumstances bill rates ranged somewhat higher,with the 91-day rate between 3.38 and 3.40 per cent until thelast three days of the period when down ward pressures havedeveloped as a result of the Treasury's advance refundingoperation.Over the period the System supplied a net total of $516million reserves, $288 million through purchases of bills,$78 million through purchases of coupon issues, and $150million through an increase in holdings of repurchase agree-ments. $247 million of the bills were purchased in themarket, consisting of very short maturities offered to usin large blocks as dealers took them back from corporationrepurchase agreements; $41 millior of other bills were pur-chased from foreign accounts. These purchases had practicallyno effect on market rates for bills. The $78 million couponissues were bought on August 23, after which no further opera-tions were undertaken in these issues in view of the imminenceof the Treasury's advance refunding operation. In the lastpart of the period, additions to reserves were made throughincreases in repurchase agreements, which were facilitatedby large increases in dealer portfolios just before and afterLabor Day.At the time of the last meeting of the Committee bill rateswere around 3.35 per cent bid for 91-day bills. In the next fewdays rates backed up to about 3.40 per cent bid as nonbank demand 9/10/63-10-tapered off and dealers displayed a cautious attitude in theface of the three bill auctions scheduled for the week beforeLabor Day, including the first billion dollars of the newmonthly one-year bills. Dealers bid quite aggressively inthese auctions, anticipating better demand at the higherrate levels, particularly as an outgrowth of the expectedadvance refunding. They also felt that the authoritieswould be satisfied with rates this close to the discountrate. Their awards in these three auctions were quitesubstantial, totaling $2,225,000,000, and their. tradingpositions were increased well above $2 billion, where theyremained, acting as a damper on the market, at least untilthe announcement of the advance refundi.ng last Wednesday.In planning for the advance refunding, the Treasuryhad recognized that the "prerefunding" portion, or the partinvolving the extension of relatively short maturities,could create downward pressures on short rates. They hadexpected to make a simultaneous announcement of an auctionof a strip of Treasury bills to counteract this effect butdecided to delay this action until they were actually facedwith the need for it. However, in announcing the advancerefunding, they stated that it was intended to meet thecash needs of approximately $6 billion for the remainderof calender 1963 largely through offerings of Treasurybills. Also, they said that the timing and magnitude ofthese borrowings would be adjusted to the pattern of cashrequirements and the needs of the balance of paymentssituation. The most recent Treasury estimates showexcessively high cash balances, at least through the endof September, so that they now feel inhibited from borrow-ing any new cash in the near future, which is unfortunatein view of the effect the advance refunding is having inincreasing the demand for bills. Since the Treasury'sannouncement last Wednesday a fairly substantial amountof "right." has been sold against purchases of billswith the result that the 91-day rate has backed downto 3.34 per cent bid and dealer bill positions have beenreduced below $2 billion. Yesterday's auction (in whichthe three- and six-month rates were 3.34 and 3.46 percent, respectively) and market performance did not reflectany further downward pressure on bill rates; in fact, thedealers were awarded $820 million more new bills in theauction. However, if there should be a resurgence ofdemand, we could find it difficult to keep the bill ratefrom falling lower in the absence of assistance from the 9/10/63Treasury. The quarterly tax date is expected to havelittle effect on the Treasury bill market.As you are probably aware, the refunding packageis made up of two parts, the "prerefunding" in which theholders of the large May 1964 maturities are offeredthree new issues, 3-7/8s of 1968, 4s of 1973, and 4-1/8sof 1989-94 (which will be reopened), and the "junioradvance refunding" in which holders of tour issues duein 1966 and 1967 are offered the 4s of 1973 and 4-1/8sof 1989-94. The terms are generous, including substan-tial cash payments by the Treasury which result in ayield as high as about 4.20 per cent tc the buyers of"rights" who wish to exchange into the long-term 4-1/8s.There was some initial surprise that the operationcovered such a wide range of eligible issues and in-cluded an offering of a long bond. The reception hasbeen favorable up to now, but the attractive pricingagainst the market required a substantial adjustmenton Thursday in prices of outstanding issues runningfrom 1/8 cf a point in the 1968 area to 3/4 of a pointin the longest term issues and almost two points in thereopened 4-1/8s of 1989-94. The Treasury has expectedan exchange of the $23 billion of public holdings ofeligible issues to the extent of about 25 per cent, or$6 billion. It is too soon to tell how it will workout, but it seems likely that this goal will be reachedand that the exchange into the long 4-1/8 per cent bondswill be substantial, possibly as much as $1 billion.The books for the exchange will close this Friday, Sep-tember 13, and the payment date will be Wednesday,September 18.Aside from the technical price adjustment inGovernment securities, the capital markets in generalhave not yet shown any significant reaction to thehigher yields made available on the long bonds. Therehas been some slight softening in the market for cor-porate bonds as two long-standing syndicates werebroken last week, but activity generally has beenlight as the market awaits the results of the advancerefunding. In view of the projected high level of itscash balances, the Treasury is taking advantage of thesupply of securities generated by the advance refundingto purchase a substantial amount of intermediate andlonger term issues for the trust accounts. This willnot only put the excess cash to work but also will re-duce the total outstanding debt, which the Treasury-11- 9/10/63 -12-believes will be bumping against the ceiling after thefirst of October. We don't yet know the total magnitudeof this program, but it is safe to say that it will mini-mize any possible effect of the advance refunding on longerterm rates. The market has not yet become fully aware ofthese purchases, and it may well be that after the entirerefunding operation is over, long rates will fall back tothe range somewhat above 4 per cent where they have beenfor some time.In discussion, it was suggested that if the market became awareof substantial Treasury purchases of longer term issues, this might pro-voke a speculative situation. Mr. Marsh replied that this subject hadbeen discussed with the Treasury yesterday. It was pointed out to theTreasury that this could encourage redundant subscriptions to the 4-1/8per cent bonds. The Treasury was aware of the possible result andactually had not been buying the 4-1/8 per cent bonds direct to anyextent. Most of its purchases had beer in other issues, mainly the4 per cent bonds of 1980.Thereupon, upon motion duly made andseconded, and by unanimcus vote, the openmarket transactions in Government securitiesand bankers' acceptances during the periodAugust 20 through September 9, 1963, wereapproved, ratified, and confirmed.At this point Mr. Hexter, Assistant General Counsel of theCommittee, and Messrs. Conkling and Daniels, Assistant Directors of theBoard's Division of Bank Operations, joined the meeting.There had been distributed a memorandum dated August 29, 1963,from Mr. Stone, Manager of the System Open Market Account, and Mr. Farrell, 9/10/63 -13-Director of the Board's Division of Bank Operations, suggesting revisionsof procedures with respect to allocations of the System Account. Thememorandum pointed out that when the present allocation procedures wereadopted in March it was indicated that as gold reserve ratios pusheddownward it would be necessary to devise new procedures that would beworkable even if such ratios should move close to 25 per cent. To datethe existing procedures had been working satisfactorily. However, withthe combined reserve ratio for all Reserve Banks now in the neighborhoodof 31 per cent, and with the fall expansion in note and deposit liabili-ties about to get under way, it seemed desirable to develop a revised setof procedures for the Committee's consideration. The proposed new pro-cedures, which were set forth as an attachment, were discussed in sonedetail in the memorandum. In addition, the hope was expressed thatbefore too long the allocation procedures--which now involved the useof high-speed computers--would have developed to a point where, if it.should be the Committee's desire, no Reserve Bank would need to showa reserve deficiency on any day as long as the combined ratio for allBanks was at least somewhat above 25 per cent..During a discussion of the proposed revised procedures, Mr.Marsh explained a minor change that had been suggested since thememorandum was distributed, and agreement with this change wasindicated. 9/10/63Thereupon, upon motion duly made andseconded, and by unanimous vote, the pro-posed revised procedures for allocating theSystem Open Market Account were adopted,effective with the reallocation forSeptember 25, 1963. The revised procedureswere as follows:1. Securities in the System Open Market Account shall bereallocated on the last business day of each statement weekand of each month by means of adjustments proportionate to theadjustments that would have been required to equalize approxi-mately the average combined reserve ratios of the 12 FederalReserve Banks based on the most recent available five businessdays' reserve ratio figures.2. The morning after each weekly and monthly statementdate, the Board's staff shall calculate the reserve ratios ofeach Bank after allowing for the indicated effects of thesettlement of the Interdistrict Settlement Fund for thepreceding day. If these calculat.ons should disclose adeficiency in the reserve ratio of any Bank, the Board'sstaff shall inform the Manager of the System Open MarketAccount, who shall make a special adjustment as of theprevious day to restore the combined reserve ratio of thatBank to the average of all the Banks or to such higher levelas may be necessary to eliminate the deficiency in note ordeposit reserves. However, such adjustments shall not bemade beyond the point where a deficiency would be createdat any other Bank. Such adjustments shall be offsetagainst the participation of the Bank or Banks best ableto absorb the additional amount or, at the discretion ofthe Manager, against the participation of the FederalReserve Bank of New York. The Board's staff and the Bankor Banks concerned shall then be notified of the amountsinvolved and the Interdistrict Settlement Fund shall beclosed after giving effect to the adjustments as of thestatement date.3. If a Bank anticipates that its reserve ratio willfall below 25 per cent on any other day (because of purchasesthat day for the System Open Market Account or for otherreasons), it may arrange with the Manager of the System OpenMarket Account for an adjustment on that day in an amountsufficient to raise its combined reserve ratio to theaverage reserve ratio of the 12 Banks combined on the pre-ceding day, or to such point as the Manager of the System-14- 9/10/63Account and the Bank concerned consider feasible. Suchsecurities shall be allocated to other Banks in order oftheir ability to absorb the largest additional amountwithout reducing their reserve ratios below the ratio ofthe 12 Barks combined.4. Until the next reallocation the Account shall beapportioned on the basis of the ratios determined inparagraph 1, after allowing for any adjustments as pro-vided for in paragraphs 2 and 3.5. Profits and losses on the sale of securitiesfrom the Account shall be allocated on the day of deliveryof the securities sold on the basis of each Bank's currentholdings at the opening of business on that day.Messrs. Hexter, Conkling, and Daniels then withdrew from themeeting.The Chairman called at this point for the usual staff economicand financial reports beginning with Mr. Brill, who presented thefollowing statement on economic developments:Not very much in the way of new economic informationhas become available since the last meeting of this Committee,but what evidence there is provides no basis for modifyingthe staff's appraisal of the economic situation. More ofthe same seems to be the order of the day.On the labor front, the unemployment rate edged downslightly in August, but at 5-1/2 per cent it still is notsignificantly different from a year ago and there continuesto be no change in the number of workers suffering fromlonger term unemployment. Some improvement in the jobsituation among adult males has been offset, in largepart, by continued inability to find enough opportunitiesfor the rising number of younger workers now entering thelabor force.On the production front, the index for August has not asyet been calculated, but present indications suggest littlechange from the July level. It is encouraging that thereappeared to have been sufficient strength in other lines ofactivity to offset the sharp decline in auto and steel out-put. It is encouraging also that in recent weeks steelproduction appears to have stabilized at these reduced-15- 9/10/63levels and that September auto production is scheduled toincrease. How far this carries, however, depends in largemeasure on the public's reception of the new auto models.As for prices, scattered reports of increases forsome industrial commodities have been balanced by reporteddeclines it others, and the over-all commodity averageremains stable at a level little different from that pre-vailing over the past two years. Unfavorable weather andincreased sales taxes contributed to the rise in consumerprices earlier in the summer, along with the usual slowbut persistent updrift in prices of services.Turning to prospective developments, the new surveyof business plant and equipment spending plans reportedby the Department of Commerce confirms earlier indicationsthat business capital outlays should be rising substantiallyover the balance of the year, with the fourth quarter rateof outlays expected to be some 8 per cent greater than ayear ago. Welcome as this rise in spending would be, onecan legitimately express some disappointment about thesurvey results. For one thing, since last autumn therehas been a persistent shortfall in actual as againstplanned spending. The shortfall has not been very largein amount, but still is a rather unusual development ina cyclical expansion during which neither strikes normaterial shortages have inhibited realization of plans.Second, the anticipated rise would bring total capitalspending for the year to a level slightly below that pro-jected by businessmen last spring, and, in fact, only about2 per cent above the levels projected almost a year ago.In light of the surprisingly strong profit and cash flowpicture that has developed this year, one might havereasonably expected some raising of sights by businessmenas to capital requirements, but apparently availabilityof funds by itself does not carry enough weight in de-termination of investment plans. Finally, one might notethat, in dollar terms, the rise in fixed capital spendingover the second half of this year--some $3 billion--islikely to be offset in large part by lower rates ofinventory accumulation than in the pre-strike-threatperiod. Over-all, therefore, the business sector'scontribution to further rise in economic activity isnot likely to be much greater than earlier this year.The enigmatic consumer remains a question mark,spending generously--weekly data suggest August retailsales up slightly from July, the third consecutive monthly-16- 9/10/63increase--but also saving providently. There are somesigns suggesting a further moderate diminution of sav-ings, particularly through financial intermediaries,but July data tend to be volatile and certainly whatinformation we have is too fragmentary to permit anyconclusion about basic shifts in trends. By and large,nothing suggests any significant deviation in consumerbehavior from recent patterns.The Federal Government's contribution to economicactivity may rise more sharply in the fourth quarter,if the military pay raise is approved and becomeseffective promptly. The outlook for other types ofFederal expenditures, however, seems to be for a con-tinued advance at the pace of recent quarters. Federalspending for goods and services, transfers, interest,and grants-in-aid has continued to rise in step withGNP throughout almost all of the recovery and expansionperiod since early 1961. This is in contrast to norise for almost two years after the 1954 recessiontrough, and to the leveling off after less than a yearof the 1958-60 upswing. Federal revenues, however,have been rising as rapidly as expenditures, and thenet of the Government's injection and withdrawal offunds has been a moderate deficit position--as measuredin the income and product accounts--that hasn't changed muchover the past two years. Again, this contrasts with therapid return to a net surplus position chat acted as adrag on the economy in earlier cyclical recoveries.However, merely not making the same fiscal mistake ishardly an adequate substitute for aggressively adoptingthe right fiscal policies. Tax reduction seems as mucha necessity today as it was last winter Unfortunately,monetary policy has to be formulat .d today in light ofthe absence of such fiscal stimulation to the domesticeconomy.Mr. Koch presented the following statement on financialdevelopments:To phrase my text for today, let us beware of over-emphasizing the importance of small and gradual changesin monetary policy, even sometimes those cumulated over aconsiderable period of time. I come back from a four-weekvacation to find a policy of monetary ease lessened slightly-17- 9/10/63again, for the fifth time since late 1961. And yet I findessentially unchanged the more fundamental indicators ofmonetary policy considered as a group, namely, the courseof bank reserves, bank credit, the money supply, bothnarrowly and broadly defined, and even interest rates, ifone excludes short-term rates, which probably have onlyminor effects on over-all economic activity.This combination of policy changes and actual eventsmay have been exactly what was sought. But it has probablybeen more a reflection of the basic forces of the demandfor credit and capital and the supply of real saving ratherthan of monetary policy. I'm afraid only a loose relation-ship can also be found to have existed between recent changesin monetary policy and international capital movements.Looking at the factual evidence t. support these obviouslysomewhat cverdrawn conclusions, the money market has firmed abit, at least since late July, although not perceptibly sincethe Committee's last meeting. Free reserves have rangedaround $100 million, as compared with about $150 millionearlier. Member bank borrowings from the Reserve Banks haveaveraged a little over $300 million a day, unchanged fromJuly. The Federal funds rate has generally been at or justunder the new 3-1/2 per cent discount rate. New York Citycommercial bank lending rates to Governnent securities dealershave been most often at 3-3/4 per cent, and the 90-dayTreasury bill rate has fluctuated between 3.35 and 3.40 per cent.Bank reserve expansion, on the othar hand, has proceededapace, despite the slightly firmer tone of the money market.Required reserves behind private deposits continue to averageabout $100 million above the guideline used in the staffmemorandu, which includes a 3 per cent secular growth rate.The money supply, narrowly defined, has probably risensomewhat again in early September after having declined alittle in August. Thus far this year, growth has been atan annual rate of about 2-1/2 per cent, as compared with1-1/2 per cent in 1962 as a whole.Time deposit growth at commercial banks has quickeneda little since the July action raising maximum rates payableon certain of these deposits, with the growth being especiallysharp in the case of negotiable time certificates of deposit.The money supply, including time deposits, continues to in-crease at a 7 to 8 per cent annual rate.As for bank credit expansion, the pace in the thirdquarter is off a little from earlier in the year, but this-18- 9/10/63may be due largely to the changed timing of Treasuryfinancing. Normally, Treasury financing in the summeroccurs in July, whereas this year it occurred in June.Bank acquisitions of municipal and Government agencysecurities continue large, as do real estate and consumerloans, with business loans experiencing a somewhat slowerrate of growth thus far this year than in 1962--about 5per cent compared with 9 per cent.Business financing through the capital markets, aswell as through the banks, has been seasonally less thissummer than earlier. These business financial develop-ments reflect somewhat larger flows of internal funds asa result of better earnings and higher depreciationaccruals and only a moderate rise in capital spending.Although on balance the major impact of a slightlyless easy monetary policy has thus far been on moneymarket conditions and short-term rates of interest, theremay be beginning to be some spillcver effects on longerterm rates and even credit availatility. Long-termGovernment, corporate, and municipal bond yields arenow all between 1/8 and 1/4 of a percentage point abovetheir lows earlier in the year. ields on intermediate-term Governments have experienced a somewhat greaterrise. Even mortgage rates appear to be under lessdownward pressure than they were earlier. This courseof longer term rates has occurred in the wake of ratherlarge System purchases of Government coupon issues inAugust. It has been accelerated by the current largeTreasury advance refunding, and there are signs thateven with larger cash flows, some corporations may bedeciding that this is a good time to borrow long-term.Having opened my remarks by noting the relativelysmall changes in the basic indicators of monetary policythat have resulted from the gradual lessening of monetaryease that has occurred, not only just this summer butindeed since late 1961, let me conclude by expressing anote of caution about this conclusion. Granted that ina private economy as large and varied as ours, monetarypolicy can normally be only a marginal and a lagginginfluence on financial and economic developments, wemay be entering a period when such an influence canbecome quite important.Bank liquidity has been decreasing for some timenow, and longer term interest rates have risen a little.In these circumstances, further reduction in monetary 9/10/63ease could unduly dampen domestic activity in general andinvestment in particular. In any case, the timing andmagnitude of the advance refunding and the current marketreadjustments that are occurring as a result of thisaction no doubt preclude any significant shift in policythroughout most, if not all, of the period between thisand the next meeting of the Committee.Mr. Furth presented the following statement with regard to theU. S. balance of payments:On the basis of the tentative and fragmentary weeklydata, the deficit for August apparently was in the neighbor-hood of $250 million, or about the same as that for July, ifboth figures are adjusted for special transactions (includingthe reversal of window-dressing in July).A deficit of that magnitude would be somewhat lower thanthe monthly averages for either the first or the second quarter;and it would be very much smaller on a seasonally adjustedbasis since the first and second quarters are seasonallyfavorable but the third quarter is seasonally unfavorable.The trade balance does not seem to have improved--onthe contrary, in July the trade surplus declined substantially.The service balance, before seasonal adjustment, certainly hasdeteriorated in view of the travel season. There is no reasonto assume a significant reduction in Government expendituresabroad; thus, the improvement would seem to have been concen-trated mainly in the capital sector.Within this sector, there does not seem to have been muchchange on short-term account. The rise in U. S. short-termrates has not altered rate differentials in relation to majorfinancial centers abroad: Euro-dollar rates have increasedvirtually as much as U. S. rates; the covered rate differentialin favor cf U. K. Treasury bills again exceeds 1/4 of 1 per cent;and while the covered differential in favor of Canadian Treasurybills, despite the rise in Canadian bill rates, has been vir-tually eliminated by a widening of the forward discount onthe Canadian dollar, the differential in favor of Canadianfinancial paper continues to attract U. S. funds. In fact,according to the admittedly fragmentary reports collected bythe New York Reserve Bank, the outflow of morey market funds,almost exclusively to Canada, amounted to $55 million grossand $40 million net during the past three weeks, or about asmuch as during the least favorable three-week period last spring.-20- 9/10/63Thus, we may guess that the improvement occurred in thelong-term sector. Since nothing has happened to diminish theoutflow of direct investments, it seems likely that the improve-ment was in portfolio investments and long-term bank lending.This assumption seems confirmed by the virtual cessation ofscheduling of foreign bond issues in the New York market,following the announcement of the equalization tax proposal.The flight: of foreign and domestic capital, predicted by somedomestic and foreign bankers, has failed to materialize--aswitnessed by the recent events in the stock market. In fact,as Mr. Coombs has suggested, the effect of the tax proposalon capital outflows may well have been greater during the pastand present period of uncertainty than it will be once the taxis enacted. Right now, nobody knows for sure what transactionswill be subject to the tax retroactively, and therefore it isvirtually impossible to take measures to avoid the tax. Oncethe tax provisions have been settled, the inevitable loopholeswill greatly reduce its effectiveness.Econcmic expansion appears to continue in foreign developedcountries. This permits us to expect a further rise in U. S.exports but also further outflows of direct investments to thosecountries. In contrast, financial chaos continues to reign insome less developed countries that are among the best U. S.customers, and especially in Brazil. This not only clouds thefuture of U. S. exports to those areas but also raises theprospect of additional calls for U. S. Government assistance.Two recent statistical reports have shed some light onrecent movements of U. S. capital. The first is a confidentialreport on dollar holdings of European countries collected bythe Bank for International Settlements. The figures aresignificant mainly because they show that, contrary to ourfears, our figures on U. S. short-term liabilities to andclaims on Europeans are pretty close to the European data.The Euro-dollar market has made for some changes in thedistribution by countries but shows about the same netbalance for Europe as a whole as the figures collected bythe Federal Reserve Banks.The second report is the survey of U. S. foreign in-vestments published in the August issue of the Survey ofCurrent Business. The stock market decline of May 1962improved the net international asset position of the U. S.during 1962, since foreign holdings in the U. S. are mainlyin the form of shares while U. S. foreign holdings are mainlydirect or fixed-interest investments. Partly in consequence,although our payments statistics showed a deficit of $3-1/2-21- 9/10/63billion in 1962, our net asset position actually improvedby $3 billion, surpassing the level reached at the end of1957. While these figures give no reason for complacency,they should remind us that we exaggerate the magnitude ofthe U. S. payments deficit if we fail to consider changesin our assets as well as in our liabilities.Equally important are the figures on our total in-vestments in foreign developed countries. If we count asgross investment abroad not only our recorded capital out--flow but also reinvested earnings of foreign subsidiariesand, say, half of the usual depreciation allowances of foreignbranches and subsidiaries, total U. S. investment in Canada,Europe, and Japan amounted to $2.8 billion in 1962--a figureequal to 80 per cent of our total deficit. If it were possibleto eliminate that investment without harming U. S. exports--or, as one member of this Committee recently suggested as analternative, to raise U. S. exports by the amount of thatinvestment by means of some tying mechanism--those short-term capital outflows that reflect bear speculation wouldpresumably cease, if not be turned into an inflow. Moreover,if it were possible to divert those funds to domestic invest-ment, this would increase gross investment in the U. S. by3-1/2 per cent, GNP probably by more than 1 per cent, andemployment perhaps by 1/2 of 1 per cent. Thus, U. S. grossinvestment in foreign developed countries may well hold thekey not only to our payments deficit but also to our lag.in domestic growth and employment. How to find the bestway to reduce that investment and especially how to cir-cumscribe the role of monetary policy in that endeavor--this is aiother story..The Chairman then called for the go-around of comments and viewson economic conditions and monetary policy beginning with Mr. Hayes, whopresented the following statement:There has been no major change in the businesssituation since our meeting three weeks ago. The upwardmovement has been broadly based but moderate in pace, andthe prospect is for a similar tendency over the comingmonths. Removal of the rail strike threat has of coursebeen a significant favorable development. Retail tradecontinues to be a bright spot in the economic picture; andthe good clean-up of 1963 auto models, together with indica-tions of strong consumer buying intentions, augurs well for-22- 9/10/63auto sales in the new model year. Plant and equipment out-lays, according to the latest survey, should show good gainsin the second half of the year, but are no higher than esti-mates made three months ago. Declines in leading indicatorsin the residential construction area may well turn out to beonly an erratic statistical movement. Underlying strengthin this field is suggested by the rising trend of new house-hold formations, lower apartment vacancy rates, and amplemortgage credit.Signs of upward price pressures, in addition to specificinfluences pushing up food prices, have become more noticeablein the past two months. However, it is certainly too earlyto interpret these developments as an inflationary break-outfrom the narrow range of major price indices over the pastthree or four years. Stock market prices indexes havetouched new highs, and volume has picked up, suggestingthat there is renewed public interest in equity shares.This rebound of activity and optimism is, no doubt, rootedin the brighter outlook for profits against the backgroundof better business prospects and the expectation of a taxcut this year. I find cause for watchfulness rather thanfor concern in recent commodity price and stock marketdevelopments.Credit conditions are also little changed in the pastthree weeks. Real estate and consumer loans have continuedto show strength, while business loans have remained slug-gish. With corporate liquidity still high, corporate fundshave tended to flow into the money market in record volume,helping the dealers to finance their inventories. Over-allnonbank liquidity seems ample. As for bank liquidity, thestatistical ratios point to some downward drift in recentmonths, to which our own policies have doubtless contributed.Yet despite the discount rate increase, the related firmingof market rates, and some increase in the pressure on bankreserve positions, the banks are still aggressively seekingnew loans, particularly in the mortgage and foreign areas.The advance refunding has had some downward influence onshort-term market rates. The persistently heavy flow ofsavings has acted as a stabilizing influence on long-termrates in the face of the System's monetary moves--althoughthe advance refunding announcement has caused some rise inlong-term rates in the last few days. The deflection ofinvestment from abroad resulting from the interest equali-zation tax proposal is likely to add moderately to thedemand for domestic longer term investments.-23- 9/10/63Turning to the balance of payments, there is some faintcause for encouragement in the declining tendency of thedeficit over the first four weeks of August and the likeli-hood that the third quarter deficit--even after adjustmentfor special window-dressing factors around the end of Juneand early July--will show a pronounced improvement over the verypoor second quarter results. The dollar has been performinga little better in the foreign exchange markets, and it maywell be that the capital account is already showing thefavorable effects of higher interest rates and reducedreserve availability in this country, together with thesharply inhibiting effects of the interest equalization taxproposal on new foreign issues. On the other hand, the out-flow of short-term funds to Canada has been resumed sincethe Canadian discount rate rise of August 12 and the sub-sequent upward adjustment of Canadian money market rates.Recent trade developments have been less encouragingthan the capital account. Imports rose in July, and as thebusiness expansion goes on, we can hardly hope to avoidfurther import increases. At the same time, exportsdeclined in July. With the over-all deficit still runningat a dangerously high level, we cannot afford to give anyless weight than we have been giving to international con-siderations. It is of course vitally important that we doshow a real improvement in the balance of payments in thethird anc' fourth quarters, if we are to build confidencethat we have been taking appropriate action, and if we areto avoid a burgeoning of fears that direct controls willbe imposed--with all that this would mean for the dollar'sstanding,Since the Treasury is in the midst of an important ad-vance refunding operation, we should aim to promote stabilityin the money market over the nex, week or ten days. There-after it would be desirable, in my judgment, to take advantageof the scmewhat greater scope for action provided us by thesteadily improving domestic business situation, and to seeka slightly greater degree of firmness in money market con-ditions and especially in Treasury bill rates. It seems tome that this would be well worth doing in order to make itclear that we "meant business" when we raised the discountrate to 3-1/2 per cent and that we intended this move tofind pretty full reflection in market rates within a reason-ably short span of time. In other words, I would hope thatthe 90-day bill rate would move into a range close to 3-1/2per cent--perhaps both above and below that figure. Our-24- 9/10/63efforts to achieve firmer bill rates should be helped by thecurrent relatively high level of dealer inventories and theTreasury's avowed intention of relying heavily on bills fortheir cash financing needs over the coming months. However,because of the current high level of cash balances, they donot expect to be able to help in this way in the near future.I would hope that higher rates could be achieved without anyvery substantial reduction in free reserve levels; but Iwould let free reserves drop to the extent needed to attainthe slightly firmer tone I have suggested as a primaryobjective.If this policy receives the Committee's support, thesecond paragraph of the directive might appropriately bemodified to reflect the Committee's wish to see a slightlygreater degree of firmness in the money market after theTreasury financing is completed.Looking a little further ahead, 1 am wondering whetherwe are approaching a time when the Board might wish to con-sider a reduction in reserve requirements as a means ofmeeting a portion of seasonal reserve needs with a minimumof downward pressure on short-term market rates.Mr. Ellis reported that the economic climate in New Englanddid not seem to have changed greatly during the summer months. Em-ployment, production, personal income, and consumer spending wererunning slightly below the national trends, and only constructionactivity was outpacing year-ago figures more decisively than theimprovement nationally. The summer vacation business had shown asubstantial gain over the year-ago experience, with the index oftourist attractions showing a 13 per cent gain in attendance inJuly. However, resort facilities reported a noticeable decline inbusiness done in Canadian currency, apparently reflecting the dis-count on the Canadian dollar.-25- 9/10/63 -26-Turning to the banking picture, Mr. Ellis said that duringJuly and August First District weekly reporting member banks had beenreadjusting their positions after the fairly rapid surge of loandemand in May and June. They had sold off about a quarter of theirGovernment securities and, despite some deposit outflows, were ableto expand their loan portfolios and buy more municipals. Largecommercial banks in Rhode Island and Vermont had recently raisedtheir rates on savings deposits to 4 per cent to meet competition.With respect to monetary policy, Mr. Ellis said two questionswere paramount. in his own analysis. One question was whether therecent discount rate action was having an effect on short-term capi-tal outflows, and the other was how the domestic economy was faringin light of the recent changes in reserve availability and interestrates. On the first question, it would be difficult to get a satis-factory answer since one could not be sure what would have happenedin other circumstances. It was known that there had been someincreases in Canadian, British, and E:.ro-dollar rates, but theshort-term capital movement did not seem to have increased. Theeffect of the interest equalization tax proposal on capital flowscould not be separated from other factors. On the second question,Mr. Ellis was inclined to be fairly optimistic about the course ofthe domestic economy. Output had increased during the summer in theface of the steel inventory reduction. Retail demand seemed strong, 9/10/63 -27-personal. income was up, reports on profits were favorable, stock mar-ket prices had moved to a new high, the construction business wasbetter than expected, and the outlook for fall business was reportedto be good. Given these factors, a stronger demand for bank creditmight be anticipated this fall.As to policy for the next three-week period, Mr. Ellis saidthat the even-keel concept would seem to have pertinence during theperiod of Treasury financing, which would preempt most of the forth-coming period. Thereafter, there would appear to be some leewayavailabl.e for monetary policy. He would meet fully the reserve needsoccasioned by seasonal expansion, but perhaps with some reluctancein order to support any tendency toward fimer rates. A zero netfree reserve figure, plus or minus, would be acceptable as a target,with uncertainties resolved on the side of less ease. He would bewilling to see the bill rate in a range from 3.40-3.50 per cent,with Federal funds regularly at 3-1/2 per cent. Such a course wouldamount in effect to a slight further shift toward less ease, andlogically a change in the policy directive would seem to be indicated.At times in the past, however, he recognized that the Committee hadpreferred to avoid issuing directives that called for delayed shiftsof policy following the completion of pending Treasury financingoperations. This led him to conclude that the Committee could affordto continue the present policy directive for another three weeks, 9/10/63 -28-after which time there could be a further appraisal of the wisdom cffollowing a slightly firmer policy.Mr. Icons said that most indicators of Eleventh District eco-nomic activity, including industrial production, employment, andconstruction either were inching upward or holding at a high levelwith seasonal coloration. Construction activity continued to bestrong. In the area of mortgage financing, brokers and mortgage menwho are regarded as leaders in the District do not admit that therehas been any deterioration in the quality of credit. However, theyagree that there has been a lengthening of maturities and lower downpayments. They also indicate that there has been too much mortgagemoney available, and rather than reduce rates, there is a tendencyto extend terms and the mortgage coverage.Turning to the District banking picture, Mr. Irons said thatloans were up in the last three weeks, with most of the increase inthe commercial and industrial loan categories although real estateand consumer loans had also increased. District banks had notheretofore been too active in mortgage financing, but there appearedto be some tendency in that direction. Demand deposits were up,particularly those of individuals, partnerships, and corporations,and time deposits also had increased. Some of the banks in theDistrict had been quite active in Federal funds, particularly onthe buying side, and had been running fairly high figures on funds 9/10/63 -29-purchased. Borrowing from the Reserve Bank had been nominal. On thewhole, District banks were rather aggressively looking for opportuni-ties to lend. They were not as liquid as they had been, perhaps, butthey were reasonably liquid.Mr. Irons said it seemed to him that monetary policy wasdefinitely limited to an even-keel position for the next two weeks,in view of the Treasury advance refunding operation. Rather thanto try to split off a few days at the end of the forthcoming three-week period, he would recommend no change in policy during the periodof Treasury financing and until market churning had ceased. Then,at its next meeting, the Committee would be in a position to con-sider whether any change in policy was appropriate. If there wereany deviatiors from an even keel, he would prefer to see them fallon the side cf a little less ease, but in general he would suggestan even-keel operation over the next three weeks. This would infera bill rate somewhere around 3.40 per cent, Federal funds trading at3-1/2 per cent, dealer rates from 3-5/8 to 3-3/4 per cent, and freereserves varying between $50 and $100 million, though without toomuch emphasis on that figure. The tone and pattern of the marketwas more significant than a free reserve figure. He would notchange the policy directive.Mr. Swan said there had been little change in the generaleconomic picture in the Twelfth District during the past three weeks. 9/10/63 -30-As preliminary data indicated at that time, the unemployment rate roseslightly in July as additions to the labor force outran a slight in-crease in total employment. Final department store sales figuresshowed an inccease from June to July, and apparently department storesales held up well in August. In the lumber industry, the anticipateddecline in prices upon cessation of the labor dispute had occurred,with both lumber and plywood prices declining sharply by the end ofAugust.For the three weeks ending August 28, weekly reporting mem-ber banks showed an increase in total loans, but the gain was lessthan half as Large as during the comparable period a year ago. Realestate loan portfolios continued to rise; the smaller increase intotal loans than a year earlier was attributable to a decline inbusiness loans. There was still no particular indication of asignificant pickup in business loans. Major banks in the TwelfthDistrict remained substantial net seLLers of Federal funds; they hadcontinued in that position last week and were expected to be on thesame side during the current week.Turning to policy, Mr. Swan said it seemed that in view ofthe Treasury refunding an. even-keel policy was called for. Further,he saw nothing in the domestic business or international situationthat would indicate the desirability of a change in present policybefore the next meeting of the Committee. Accordingly, his preference 9/10/63 -31-would be to maintain the present position through the entire three-week period, both because of the Treasury financing and the generaleconomic picture. He agreed substantially with the target figuresindicated by Mr. Irons. If the bill rate returned to a level ofabout 3,40 per cent, he would consider that as being within thescope of present policy, but he woulo doubt that an increase to 3.50per cent should be regarded as falling within this general definition.He hoped the existing general market position could be maintained,with free reserves around the $100 million level.With respect to the policy directive, Mr. Swan said he wouldsuggest no change, except perhaps the insection of a phrase such as"in view of the current Treasury refunding" in the first part ofthe second paragraph.Mr. Deming reported that business sentiment in the Ninth Dis-trict,as measured by the Reserve Bank's opinion survey of early Septem-ber, was quite optimistic, with three out of four respondents seeingimprovement in the near-term future and most of the remainder lookingfor continuation of present high-level activity. Only 6 per cent ofthe respondents saw a possible decline ahead. This sentiment undoubtedlyreflected both a strong agricultural situation and a modestly expandingnonfarm sector. The 1963 wheat crop was the largest since 1958, anda near record. Both corn and soybeans were very good. Altogether,total crop output might be second only to 1958. Range and pasture 9/10/63 -32-conditions were favorable and conducive to normal fall livestock mar-ketings. Nonagricultural employment was expanding modestly, and hoursworked in manufacturing in July averaged 42.1 per week, higher thanthe national average. Bank debits were up strongly from year-agolevels. Electric power use in industry was sharply higher in July,and personal income in that month was 5 per cent ahead of a yearearlier. The major area of weakness continued to be mining.The banking picture contrasted rather sharply with the over-all economic situation in the District. In general, loan, investment,and deposit trends in the first half of 1963 were strongly upward,after allowing for seasonal factors. In July, bank credit behavedabout seasonally, but deposits declined more than seasonally,reflecting mainly the reduction in Government balances and apparentlya consequent outflow from the District. In August, the deposit trendof July continued and was accentuated as interbank balances werereduced along with Government deposits. Time deposit growth, how-ever, was fairly strong, and ordinary demand deposit behavior wasabout normal. Bank credit at country banks was about as expected,but at city banks loans dropped rather sharply and contraseasonally,reflecting weakness in most loan categories and particularly inbusiness loans. This movement seemed to be carrying over into earlySeptember and was accented. City bank investments were expanding,but not enough to offset the loan decline. 9/10/63 -33-As to policy, Mr. Deming expressed the view that with an evenkeel indicated for most of the forthcoming three-week period, it. wouldbe well to follow such a course for the entire period. He was notsure, however, exactly what was comprehended by an even-keel conceptduring the three weeks. He would like to see the bill rate returnto the 3.40 per cent level, with free reserves around $100 million,but he was not certain that both of these objectives could beaccomplished. If not, he would be inclined to let the free reservelevel drop a bit to insure that the bill rate did not fall signifi-cantly. While he would not attempt to push the bill rate back to3.40 per cent just for the sake of attaning that Level, it wouldbe undesirable if the rate fell much below the present level. Inview of his policy suggestions, quite obviously he would see noreason to change the current economic policy directive.Mr. Scanlon reported that business activity continued at afavorable level in the Seventh Federal Reserve District and wasgenerally expected to show further improvement. Retail sales, atleast of nondurables, appeared to have reached another new high inAugust, while unemployment insurance claims remained at a low level.Production of steel probably reached its low in mid-August and wasnow rising. Producers of autos and trucks were highly confidentthat the new models soon to be offered for sale would be accordeda favorable reception by buyers. Orders for most types of capital 9/10/63 -34-goods and construction contracts had been at a high level, indicatingsome further rise in activity in these lines.Department store sales in the District apparently reached anew seasonally adjusted high in August. The rate of net inflow ofsavings to banks and savings and loan associations in the Districtslackened appreciably in July. Withdrawals, while above the pre-ceding month and July of last year, were generally in line withearlier months this year.Mortgage interest rates appeared not to have been affectedyet by any firming of money markets. A Reserve Bank survey showedsome further easing of rates in the Chicago area in July. Theaverage effective rate on new home mortgages was 5.8 per cent com-pared with 6.0 per cent in July of last year.Total credit at District banks declined in August as holdingsof Government securities were reduced rather sharply--about $250million at Chicago banks since the end of July. Despite a reductionin dealer loans, total loans rose moderately, as a result of increasesin both the business and consumer categories. Recent strength inbusiness loans reflected, in part, a large credit in the chemicalscategory recorded early in the month. Durable goods manufacturersand trade firms repaid bank loans on balance in August. Demand fornon-real estate farm loans at agricultural banks was very strong inJuly, partly because of a heavy volume of purchases of feeder cattle 9/10/63 -35-by farmers and partly because of renewals necessitated by delayed mar-keting of fed cattle, drought conditions in some areas, and otherfactors. The large Chicago banks reported a net decline in loanssince early August. This development, coupled with further salesof Treasury bills, had contributed to an easier reserve position.These banks had been able to cover their needs fully in the Federalfunds market, and borrowing by other District banks had been at alow level.Mr. Scanlon concurred in the view that an even-keel policywas called for during the next three weeks. He would not be dis-turbed by a short bill rate in the 3.40 per cent area, but in viewof the possibility of downward pressure during the next few weeks,he would not press to achieve that rate. In the present circum-stances, he would favor no change in the directive, and he wouldnot change the discount rate.Mr. Clay expressed the view that during the next three weeksit would appear logical to pursue essentially the same policy thathad been adopted at the Committee meeting three weeks earlier. Themost immediate reason for not changing policy was the Treasuryfinancing operation that would be under way during the period. Quiteapart from Treasury financing, however, he felt it would be in orderto continue the same policy. That policy posture constituted the 9/10/63 -36-implementation of the change that was initiated with the discount rateaction in mid-July, and the System should continue to carry out thedecision represented by that action.For the period ahead, Mr. Clay continued, pursuit of thispolicy would appear to call for maintaining a degree of money marketfirmness represented by a Treasury bill rate of about 3-3/8 per cent.The current directive also called for accommodating moderate expan-sion in bank reserves, and that also should be continued. In orderto facilitate the attainment of these objectives, the Account Managershould conduct operations in various maturities as necessary, recog-nizing that such operations might be limited by the Treasury'sfinancing activities in the interval ahead. The discount rateshould be left unchanged. With reference to the directive, considera-tion should be given to rewording the second sentence of the firstparagraph, in view of money supply developments in August. Thelast paragraph of the directive could be left unchanged.Mr. Wayne said that signs of improvement in Fifth Districtbusiness were definitely more numerous than a few weeks earlier.Although some of these favorable items described conditions anumber of weeks earlier, they added a significant impression ofstrength to the current picture. In July, for instance, seasonallyadjusted nonfarm employment passed the five-million mark for thefirst time as jobs in trade, contract construction, services, and 9/10/63 -37-government all. reached record levels. Bank debits, manufacturing man-hours, and cigarette production were also at all-time highs. InAugust, rates of insured unemployment were mostly well below thenational average. Department store sales, at a high level in July,showed further improvement in August. General business sentiment,as revealed in the Reserve Bank's latest survey, remained moderatelyoptimistic. Manufacturers reported small gains in new orders, orderbacklogs, shipments, wages, and prices, with employment and hoursvirtually unchanged. The agricultural outlook, particularly forpastures and late crops, had improved slightly as a result ofscattered rairs. Loan demand continued strong in the District,perhaps a lit, le stronger than in the nation as a whole.On the national front the most important news seemed to be nonews of any significant weakness in the vacation month of August. Thetemporary solution of the rail dispute had removed one potentiallyserious roadblock, and civil rights disturbances apparently had nothad any significant effects on business activity generally. On thepositive side, the little information available for August seemed toindicate that the economy continued to operate at a high level withperhaps some increases in particular areas. The continuing strengthin prices after significant rises in July apparently indicated con-siderable strength in demand. Retail sales seemed to be holding theirown at a high level. Purchasing agents noted a small rise in new 9/10/63 -38-orders, with production and employment remaining about steady. Withalmost no definite movements to serve as guides, the sustained strengthof recent weeks could only be regarded as a possible indicator of asatisfactory rate of activity in the weeks immediately ahead and maybea little better than seasonal rise during the fall months.In the policy area, Mr. Wayne felt that the Desk had done agood job in carrying out the current directive in the face of con-siderable difficulties. He concurred in the view that an even keelwas indicated for the next two weeks, and in view of general condi-tions he saw no reason to change policy during the entire three-weekperiod. As to targets, he agreed generally with the suggestions ofMr. Deming. Accordingly, he would renew the present policy directive,except for such change as might be deemed advisable in recognition ofthe Treasury financing. He would not change the discount rate atthis time.Mr. Rcbertson presented the following statement:I am sure that all of us have been studying the recentreports cn business developments with special care, lookingfor the first clues as to the trend of business this fall--now that we have passed the traditional Labor Day jumping-off point. I have been doing so, but it seems to me theflow of evidence is inconclusive at this point. The fallbusiness expansion is still more a matter of hope than any-thing else, although a few more weeks of figures may removesome of the doubts that now exist. I have watched particu-larly closely the trend of prices in recent weeks, for thesuccession of price increases being reported was a source 9/10/63of real concern to me. Our general price stability is oneof the key achievements of recent years, and one that weare going to have to maintain if we are to achieve anyorderly resolution of our domestic and international prob-lems. If a general price upcreep were to start, I thinkmonetary policy would have to be prepared to do its partto resist. Fortunately, the latest and most comprehensiveinformation on wholesale prices suggests that price increasesand decreases are still essentially offsetting, and thatmeans to me that we still are in a period when monetarypolicy can be broadly stimulative in the interest of pro-mot.ing greater employment of our resources.I note with some satisfaction the apparent (thoughinadequately explained) improvement in our over-all balanceof payments during the past two months, and I think we oughtto watch carefully to judge both the sources of that improve-ment and how long it may continue. I doubt that little, ifany, of this improvement can be attributed to our changedmonetary policy, and I would not think any further changein policy for balance of payments reasons would be inorder until the extent and duration cf the recent improve-ment is more clear.I am troubled by some of the domestic financial conse-quences that may be developing as a result of both ouractions and the debt management operations of the Treasury.I refer to the higher interest rates and more cautious tonethat have appeared in the capital markets, and the steppingup of reserve pressures on banks to the point where theyhave had to make substantial sales of Government securities.I think it is unclear at this juncture how far such adjust-ments will proceed, but at some point they must surely beginto alter lender and investor attitudes towards additionalrequests for loans, and at that point our policy of "lessease" will, in my judgment, have gone too far. Indeed, wemay have passed that point already, although it is verydifficul: to judge. At the very least., I think we shouldhold our policy course steady over the next few weeks,watching carefully for cumulative consequences of thefirmer money and capital market conditions that have beencreated. The huge Treasury advance refunding, of course,is itself a factor tightening long-term markets, and shouldlead us to maintain "even keel" considerations for the fullperiod of time during which the market is involved in thisoperation. And in this case it is my view that "even keel"should be judged more in terms of reserve positions, Federal-39- 9/10/63 -40-funds rates, and dealer needs than by the bill rate, whichmay be selectively depressed by reinvestment demand frominvestors uninterested in the advance refunding offering.A selective remedy for such downward rate pressure isreadily at hand in the form of the sale of additional billsby the Treasury. I think that is the appropriate tool fordoing any tinkering that is to be done with the bill rateat this juncture. I would not want to see us again use thegeneral tool of increased reserve pressure to squeeze billsout of the banking system, as we. have done over the pastsix weeks. I think the full consequences of that courseof action are not yet known to us, and we may well regretthe eventual effects upon bank and public liquidity whenall the facts are in.In conclusion, Mr. Robertson said that he would not favorchanging the policy directive. Neither would he favor changing thediscount rate at this time.Mr. Shepardson said that economic developments seemed gener-ally encouraging. However, the crawl of prices concerned him. Ad-mittedly, it was not a great crawl, but it was a movement in the wrong.direction if one expected to achieve economic growth and greaterutilization of resources. While he did. not know how to measure theimpact of the recent change in the minimum wage, it certainly wouldbe conducive to holding up prices. Whateve effect it might havefrom the price standpoint would he in the wrong direction.To repeat, he was concerned that if there continued to be acrawl in prices, this would affect adversely both the trade balanceand the growth of the domestic economy.However, in light of the Treasury financing, it seemed appro-priate to Mr. Shepardson to continue the present monetary policy at 9/10/63this time. He was inclined toward a position such as Mr. Ellis hadoutlined, with the understanding, however, that because of theTreasury financing, the present policy should be continued for thefull three-week period ahead. Accordingly, he would favor renewingthe policy directive without change.Mr. King said that he agreed with the remarks of those whofavored no change in the policy for the forthcoming three-weekperiod. He doubted the necessity of changing the policy directiveto make reference to the current Treasury financing operation. Attimes such a reference was necessary, but not on every occasion whenan even-keel policy was to be followed. He also felt there shouldbe no change in the discount rate. As he saw it, allaspects ofpresent policy should be continued.Mr. Mi.tchell said that he thought no change in policy was thecourse indicated for the coming period. He felt that the Desk shouldnot fight a modest lowering of the bill rate, because of technicalitiesthat might produce pressure. On the other hand, if market forces pro-duced a rise in the bill rate, he would be agreeable to seeing the ratemove back up to 3.40 per cent.Mr. Hickman commented that the flow of statistical informationsince the last Committee meeting had been meager, but on the whole hadtended to support the forecast of a quiet August, followed by renewedstrength in the autumn. In the Fourth District in.August, underlying-41- 9/10/63 -42-strength was evidenced by brisk department store sales and by the con-tinued large volume of residential building. A small increase in un-employment in the District was limited to auto and steel centers.The pickup in steel orders, the first indications of whichwere noted at the previous Committee meeting, had strengthened inrecent weeks, at the same time that ingot output appeared to bebottoming out, It was evident that the end of the reaction phase insteel was near, with a fresh demonstration of the resilience of theeconomy in having absorbed the steel downdrag.When the steel industry had completed its turn, and when 1964autos became available for sale, there might well be a question as towhether the term "moderate" business expansion would continue to beappropriate. A full-blown expansion similar to those experiencedduring the 1950's could possibly be in the making. Any such develo-ment would imply, either as cause or effect, a significant renewal ofrising commodity prices. So far the latter had not occurred, butrecent price developments had been showing some faint signs of anupward stir. Paper had now joined steel, nonferrous metals, rubbertires, and cigarettes on the up side. The industrial component ofthe wholesale price index had edged up by a fraction of an indexpoint in each of three successive months through July, and an additionalslight nudge to prices might follow the recent statutory rise in the 9/10/63 -43-minimum wage. Altogether, the price front would bear watching, althoughit would be premature to conclude that a new phase had set in.It seemed to Mr. Hickman that monetary policy had done aboutall that could be expected of it over the past three weeks, and thatthe Desk had done a skillful job. Since the discount rate action,i.e., in the period from July 17 through August 28, total loan demandat reporting banks had been stronger than in recent years, and withtheir present reserve positions, banks had been forced to liquidateinvestments to a greater extent than usual. Insofar as this greater-than-seasonal loan demand continued, he would favor allowing thepressures to be reflected in the market.. This might mean a level offree reserves moderately below recent levels, and a growth of actualrequired reserves below present staff targets.It should be kept in mind, Mr. Hickman added, that price sta-bility could no longer be taken for granted, that the economy waspoised for a possible takeoff, and that the volume of liquid assetsheld by the public continued to rise vigorously and bore the highestratio to GNP since 1958.Mr. Hilkert said that since the previous meeting of theCommittee, Third District business conditions had improved slightlyand tightness had become more evident on the banking scene. Buteconomic conditions had not improved sufficiently to help the Dis-trict's lagging rate of economic growth. 9/10/63Unemployment claims continued well below the totals of recentyears, and unemployment had decreased over the summer, but half theDistrict's labor markets still had unemployment rates higher than thenation's. Some increases in output, evidenced by greater-than-seasonalincreases in electric power consumption in the District's manufactur-ing industries, had not been reflected in manufacturing employment orin the workweek. Construction contract awards had failed to exceed1962 levels, while doing so nationally. Department store sales inthe latest four weeks improved a bit over 1962, but not enough tochange the Third District's year-to-date deficit of one per cent.Conditions at Third District banks had tightened during thepast three weeks. Basic reserve positions were consistently on theminus side, and District banks lost a little over $100 million indeposits. Business loans fell by $8 million, thus contributing toa total decline in these loans of $40 million since the beginningof the year. Investments were also off, ar.d the total of loans andinvestments fell by $17 million.Mr. Patterson said that if the latest statistics for theSixth District showed anything new, it was the accumulation ofadditional evidence to confirm the renewed vigor in economic expan-sion that began to be evident toward the latter part of the summer.The expansion was not of boom proportions, and was not shared equallyby all areas of the District, Nevertheless, it had been a pleasantsurprise to some persons who were expecting a slowdown during the-44- 9/10/63 -45-last half of 1963. Apparently, the District's economy was performingslightly better than the nation's.Construction, both residential and nonresidential, was one ofthe brightest spots. A greater-than-usual part of residential con-struction was taking place outside the major metropolitan areas. Inthe nonresidential category, the impact of the expanded space programwas beginning to be felt with the awarding of a substantial contractfor the construction of a missile test center in Southern Mississippithat might absorb some of the workers released by completion of a$125 million oil refinery in the same area.Manufacturing employment in the District was rising and retail.spending had moved up. Although fall harvest activity was still light,larger-than-usual crops of cotton, peanuts, and corn were expected.There would be a bumper crop of pecans.The step-up in economic activity was reflected in the latestbanking figures. Incomplete data suggested that total bank creditrose in August, with substantial loan increases in Florida andGeorgia. With total deposits, reserves, and excess reserves up andmember bank borrowing off, there were no signs that recent FederalReserve policy had resulted in any credit stringency within theDistrict.Mr. Shuford reported that the economy of the Eighth Districthad continued to expand during the summer months. Employment in the 9/10/63 -46-major metropolitan areas had risen about 4 per cent since last spring,and there was a marked rise in the industrial use of electric power.Other indicators also had evidenced what seemed to be a good solidgrowth in the economy. Nationally, there had been a marked rise inbusiness activity that began early this year and appeared from pre-liminary figures to have continued into August and perhaps earlySeptember.Mr. Shuford said he was inclined toward the view that theeconomic improvement had been facilitated by the degree of availa-bility of bank reserves and the monetary expansion that occurredlast fall and in the first part of this year. Over the past yearthe System had been able to make some contribution both to the highlevel of domestic business activity and the balance of paymentsproblem; the total demand for goods and services had been stimulatedor at least facilitated by bank reserve and monetary expansion atmoderate rates. At the same time, while it was too early to judge,it appeared that the rise in short-term rates had, to some degree,made a contribution from the standpoint of the balance of paymentsproblem.Insofar as current policy was concerned, Mr. Shuford said hewould favor no change in view of the Treasury financing. He wouldlike to see the short-term rate at about the level that had prevailedin recent weeks--somewhere around 3.37-3.40 per cent. While monetary 9/10/63 -47-expansion might appropriately be more moderate than last fall, itshould be adequate enough to support a continuation of the businessimprovement that had been experienced so far this year. He wouldnot favor any change in the discount rate at this time, and he sawno reason to change the policy directive.Mr. Balderston said that certain of his own concerns had beenset forth by Mr. Hickman and that he would also like to mention twoothers. One was the continuing tendency to put savings and otherresources into mortgages, especially for the construction of income-producing property. Of the total outstanding mortgage debt of $263billion, which had been rising at a monthly rate of about $2 billion,the debt on one-to-four family houses was now about $175 billion. Oneindication of a lowering of lending standards that had attracted theattention of Mr. Fisher of the Board's research staff was that in Julyone-fourth of the conventional mortgages on new single-family dwellingswere for terms of 25 years or more.Mr. Balderston went on to say that his other concern was overthe rail. strike issue. The country may have felt some sense of reliefin the postponement of the strike. However, the postponement wasaccomplished only at the expense of interference with the process ofcollective bargaining, which might lead eventually to interference inprice setting and other matters. In his view, there were worse thingsthan a strike, and the strike now remained for settlement during thewinter when any interference with the movement of coal was so important. 9/10/63 -48-The central issue was how many jobs the union was willing to give upas the result of automation, and thus far no criteria for the settle-ment of that issue had been provided. Thus, Mr. Balderston said, theexuberance of the moment must be tempered by thoughts of a deteriora-tion in the quality of lending and by what might prove to have been amisstep in the settlement of a labor dispute.As to policy for the forthcoming period, Mr. Balderston saidhe agreed with what had been said by others at this meeting. He feltthe policy of the previous period should be continued for the nextthree weeks, but he hoped that events might permit pressing the billrate somewhat closer to the discount rate.Chairman Martin said he continued of the view that both thedomestic business situation and the balance of payments situationhad been improved by the actions of the System this summer, whichhad tended to take up some of the slack in the line. Reports of anoverabundance of mortgage money in some areas, as mentioned by Mr.Irons, gave pause for concern.The Chairman went on to say he had always been of the feelingthat, generally speaking, it was inadvisable to provide for a changeof policy within the course of a three-week period between Committeemeetings. Policy should be made at meetings of the Committee andnot be projected into a future time period. It seemed to him thatin the present situation it would be well to wait until the October 1 9/10/63meeting, when the Treasury would have completed a major financingoperation, to decide on any change in policy that might seem to beneeeded.Chairman Martin suggested that the policy directive might bechanged to make reference to the Treasury refunding operation becauseof its size, although such recognition might not be necessary on alloccasions of Treasury financing. This could be done, if the Committeeso desired, simply by inserting the words "and taking account of thecurrent Treasury refunding operation" in the first part of the secondparagraph. He proposed that a vote be taken on the directive in aform in which it would otherwise be unchanged, with the understandingthat this would infer the maintenance of policy "as is" for the forth-coming three-week period.Thereupon, upon motion duly madeand seconded, the Federal Reserve Bankof New York was authorized and directed,until otherwise directed by the Committee,to execute transactions in the SystemAccount in accordance with the followingcurrent economic policy directive:It is the Committee's current policy to accommodatemoderate growth in bank credit, while putting increasedemphasis on money market conditions that would contributeto an improvement in the capital account of the U.S.balanceof payments. This policy takes into consideration the con-tinuing adverse balance of payments position and its cumula-tive effects and the high level of domestic business activity,as well as the increases in bank credit, money supply, andthe reserve base in recent months. At the same time, however,it recognizes the continuing underutilization of resources.-49- 9/10/63To implement this policy, and taking account of thecurrent Treasury refunding operation, System open marketoperations shall be conducted with a view to maintainingthe prevailing degree of firmness in the money market,while accommodating moderate expansion in aggregate bankreserves.Votes for this action: Messrs.Martin, Hayes, Balderston, Clay,Irons, King, Mitchell, Robertson,Scanlon, Shepardson, and Wayne.Votes against this action: none.It was agreed that the next meeting of the Open Market Committeewould be held on Tuesday, October 1, 1963.The meeting then adjourned.Secretary-50-