 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in theoffices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington on Tuesday, December 17, 1963, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Martin, ChairmanMr. Hayes, Vice ChairmanMr. BoppMr. ClayMr. DaaneMr. IronsMr. MillsMr. MitchellMr. RobertsonMr. ScanlonMr. ShepardsonMessrs. Hickman, Wayne, Shuford, and Swan, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Ellis, Bryan, and Deming, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Boston, Atlanta, andMinneapolis, respectivelyMr. Sherman, Assistant SecretaryMr. Kenyon, Assistant SecretaryMr. Hackley, General CounselMr. Noyes, EconomistMessrs. Baughman, Brill, Eastburn, Furth, Garvy,Green, Holland, Koch, and Tow, AssociateEconomistsMr. Stone, Manager, System Open Market AccountMr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of GovernorsMr. Broida, Assistant Secretary, Board of GovernorsMr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Yager, Chief, Government Finance Section,Division of Research and Statistics, Boardof GovernorsMiss Eaton, Secretary, Office of the Secretary,Board of Governors 12/17/63 -2-Messrs. Sanford, Mann, Ratchford, Jones, andGrove, Vice Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of New York, Cleveland,Richmond, St. Loui, and San Francisco,respectivelyMr. Brandt, Assistant Vice President of theReserve Bank of AtlantaMr. Willis, Economic Adviser, Federal ReserveBank of BostonMr. Kareken, Economic Consultant, FederalReserve Bank of MinneapolisMr. Meek, Manager, Securities Department,Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkUpon motion duly made and seconded,and by unanimous vote, the m .nutes of themeetings of the Federal Open Market Com-mittee held on November 12 and November26, 1963, were approved.Mr. Mills asked whether it was the thought of the Committeethat the decision taken at the December 3 meeting on the proceduresfor allocation of securities in the Open Market Account should betreated as perfunctorily as it was in the draft minutes, which simplycited the fact that the revised procedures had been approved.After discussion of this point, it was noted that the draftminutes for December 3 were still open for review and that they couldbe modified to such extent as might be considered appropriate. Inthis connection, Mr. Sherman observed that a fuller record of thediscussion of the question of possible deficiencies in Reserve Bankreserves against note and deposit liabilities would be included in theminutes of the meeting of the Federal Reserve Bank Presidents with theBoard of Governors that took place on the afternoon of December 3. 12/17/63 -3-Before this meeting there had been distributed to the membersof the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System OpenMarket Account on foreign exchange market conditions and on Open MarketAccount and Treasury operations in foreign currencies for the periodDecember 3 through December 11, 1963, and a supplementary reportcovering the period December 12 through December 16, 1963. Copies ofthese reports have been placed in the files of the Committee.Supplementing the written reports, Mr. Sanford commented thatthe Treasury gold stock this week should remain unchanged for theeighteenth consecutive week. It was likely, however, that the followingweek would show a sizable decline in order to provide for gold salesexpected later this month and in January, which should serve as areminder that the balance of payments problem was far from beingeliminated. In the two weeks since the meeting of December 3 Russiansales of gold had been reduced to comparatively small figures. So farin December, the London gold pool had accumulated only a small amountof gold.Since the December 3 meeting, Mr. Sanford continued, the System'sdrawings on the swap arrangement with the Bundesbank had been increasedfurther by a total of $34 million, making the outstanding amount $136million. The Account's gross debtor position on all swaps was now $376million and its net debtor position was $326 million. 12/17/63Year-end window dressing needs of German banks continued duringthe past two weeks--although there was some evidence in the past fewdays of their having passed their peak-.-but capital continued to flowinto Germany and that country continued to have a favorable trade balance.Of the Account's drawings of $34 million in the past two weeks $28 millionhad gone to absorb part of the Bundesbank's takings of dollars, and $6million had been used for operations in the New York market. With the aidof an expected large German military goods payment later in the month,sizable progress was anticipated in reducing the drawings on the Germanswap arrangement. The German mark had fluctuated only between $0.2516-3/4and $0.2517-3/8 in the past two weeks, a bit away from its ceiling, andtoday the mark had eased a bit.The Sw.ss franc had been at or close to its effective ceiling,Mr. Sanford said, reflecting in part year-end liquidity requirements ofSwiss banks for Swiss francs. To aid in handling this situation, theSwiss National Bank since December 10 had been buying spot dollars andselling t..em for one-month forward delivery, meanwhile laying them offto the Bank for International Settlements on a dollar/gold swap. Henoted parenthetically that the U. S. Treasury had been extending maturingSwiss franc contracts with Swiss commercial banks.Mr. Sanford said that for a short while the French franc hadbeen a bit off its ceiling, probably reflecting a development having todo with Euro-dollars and other European currencies about which he wouldspeak later. 12/17/63 -5-The Canadian dollar, which had been holding steady, had tendedto ease of late, and the Bank of Canada had sold U. S. dollars tosupport the rate. This, together with their expectation that they wouldbe further sellers to provide U. S. dollars for conversion of year-endCanadian dividends and for year-end settlements, gave the Account anopportunity to acquire sufficient Canadian dollars from the Bank ofCanada to permit complete retirement on December 16 of the swap drawingsequivalent to $20 million which were entered into in the latter part ofNovember because of the tragic event of that period.Mr. Sanford reported that the Euro-dollar market had been subjectto considerable pressures in December as a result of the approach of theyear end and several extraordinary developments, and rates had moved up--in the case of the 90-day maturity by 1/2 per cent. It now appearedthat the Stinnes and Ira Haupt situations, in which Euro-dollars hadbeen providing some financing, had resulted in the development of a morequestioning attitude on the part of some who heretofore had depositeddollars in the Euro-dollar market; there had even been some indicationsthat U. S. corporations, to some unknown degree, had been pulling backfunds. A further indication of the pull-back of funds, which alwaysoccurred, however, to some degree at the year end, was that Japanesesbanks had had $100 million of Euro-dollars withdrawn from them, withclosely corresponding effects on Japanese official reserves. 12/17/63Mr. Sanford said the French development that he had mentionedearlier had taken the form of a warning by the Governor of the Bank ofFrance to the French market calling their attention to several factors,including (1) that operations effected on the Euro-currency markets,entailing as they did serious risks, could not be considered as currenttransactions in the foreign exchange markets but only as credit opera-tions which must be handled with at least the same care as operationstransacted for the benefit of French residents; (2) the duration ofinvestments was to be adapted to that of the borrowings; (3) it was wellknown that some countries, and in some countries some business enter-prises, made excessive, and therefore generally dangerous, use of allfunds borrowed abroad. The Governor of the Bank of France pointed outin the warning that the French authorities had taken the necessarymeasures to prohibit such errors by French enterprises. French banksalso had to abstain in their own interest, as well as in the generalinterest, from granting excessive facilities to banks or businessenterprises established abroad, about which they did not always havesufficient information, especially since it also was known that theexchange thus lent was often re-lent to third parties in that samecountry or elsewhere. Mr. Sanford added that there had been criticismin France of the tenor of the warning, since it was held that only oneFrench bank had suffered losses.-6- 12/17/63Mr. Daane mentioned that there had been confirmation in Europeduring the past week, particularly from the Japanese, that the flow ofnew funds into the Euro-dollar market was drying up, and he askedwhether this had been reflected in the U. S. balance of payments figures.Mr. Sanford replied that it was not possible to isolate the effects ofsuch a development in the weekly balance of payments reports. It wasreflected, however, in transactions in the New York money market; theJapanese government, for instance, was selling U. S. Treasury bills toprovide funds for Japanese commercial banks to repay Euro-dollar loansthey were unable to renew.Thereupon, upon motion duly made andseconded, and by unanimous vote, the SystemOpen Market Account transactions in foreigncurrencies during the period December 3through December 16, 1963, were approved,ratified, and confirmed.Mr. Sanford recommended that the swap arrangement with the Bankof Canada in the amount of $250 million, which matured December 27, 1963,be renewed. Noting that this arrangement had been renewed every threemonths since its inception in June 1962, he recommended placing it on aone-year basis while maintaining at three months the drawing provisionwhich was, of course, subject to mutual agreement. He indicated thatthis would tend to simplify procedures and to remove some existing con-fusion when both the swap arrangement and the drawing provision were on athree-month basis, and that it would be a further indication to outside 12/17/63 -8-observers that there was indeed a strong and continuing solidaritybetween the central banks. It was believed that the Bank of Canadawould find a one year renewal of the swap arrangement satisfactory,Mr. Sandford said, and he noted that the arrangement with the Bank ofEngland was for a one year period,Mr. Mills commented that a one year arrangement with Canada orany other country might well extend through a period in which a changein government occurred, and the arrangement would thus be fixed for theadvantage of a succeeding government whose thinking and policies mightbe of a quite different kind from those of the government in office atthe time the arrangement was made.Mr. Sanford agreed that such a situation could arise. But, heobserved, each drawing was limited to a period of three months and wouldbe entered into only on mutual agreement of the parties. Thus, theSystem as well as the other central bank involved had to agree to adrawing before it could be made.Mr. Ellis asked whether the logic supporting the extension ofthe Canadian arrangement to a one year perioc' would apply to all swaparrangements. Mr. Sanford expressed the view that it would apply to anumber of them, but not necessarily to all. He felt the Committee mightnot want to move to a one year basis for some of the newer arrangementsunder which there as yet had been little experience, but it probablywould be thought desirable to extend others to one year as the occasion 12/17/63 -9-arose. A one year basis indicated considerably more solidarity betweenthe central banks and, incidentally, it substantially reduced the amountof paper work required.Mr. Hickman suggested that an intention to change the amount ofa particular arrangement might provide a reason for not lengthening itsperiod, and Mr. Sanford agreed. However, he noted, in the past theamounts of particular 3- and 6-month arrangements had been changed duringthe period of the arrangement.Mr. Mills commented that while it was theoretically possible torefuse tc agree to a particular drawing under a one year swap arrangement,to do so might lead to a charge of bad faith, since a commitment for oneyear had been made. He did not question extension of the Canadianagreement, but he thought that publication of the terms of the arrange-ments would invite invidious comparisors if some were on a long-termbasis and others were not. Such a situation would be impolitic anddifficult to handle, in his judgment.Chairman Martin commented that the Committee had already startedin this direction by placing its arrangement with the Bank of England ona one year basis.Mr. Hayes considered it likely that the Committee would eventuallywant to go to a one year basis for many of the agreements, but he saw nonecessity for determining the matter at this time. 12/17/63 -10-The Chairman then suggested that the Committee vote on therecommendation with respect to renewing the Canadian arrangement fora one year period, with the understanding that no precedent would beestablished if the Committee approved the proposal.Thereupon, renewal of the swap arrange-ment with the Bank of Canada for $250 millionfor a one year period was approved.Mr. Mitchell commented that frequently the recommendations ofthe Special Manager came to the Committee without advance notice.Sometimes this was unavoidable, but on other occasions it would bepossible for the Committee to be advised in advance that a certainrecommendation was going to be made. It. seemed to him that with suchadvance notice the Committee could dispose of the Special Manager'srecommendations more effectively and expeditiously.Chairman Martin suggested that the Special Manager work withthe Committee Secretariat to see what could be done along such lines.In further remarks, Mr. Sanford advised, for reasons which heoutlined, that there was no progress to report on the matter of a possibleincrease in the swap arrangement with the Bank of France.Mr. Sanford also mentioned that drawings on the Netherlands Bankswap arrangement of $20 million and $60 million equivalent in guilderswould mature on December 27, 1963, and January 2, 1964, respectively, anddrawings on the B.I.S. of $50 million and $25 million equivalent in Swissfrancs would mature December 30, 1963, and January 7, 1964, respectively. 12/17/63 -11-To the extent that it was not possible to reduce these drawings bytheir respective maturity dates, it would be necessary to seekrenewal for further three-month periods. These would be the firstrenewals of these particular drawings.In reply to a question, Mr. Sanford said the drawings inquestion originally had been made in late September and early October,and earlier drawings of guilders and Swiss francs had been repaidbefore these drawings were made.The proposed renewal of the drawings,to such extent as might be necessary, wasnoted without objection.Before this meeting there had been distributed a report fromthe Manager of the System Open Market Account covering open marketoperations in U.S. Government securities and bankers' acceptances forthe period December 3 through December 16, 1963. A copy of thisreport has been placed in the files of the Committee.In supplementation of the written report Mr. Stone commentedas follows:There is little to add to the written reports regardingdevelopments in the brief period since the last meeting. Inthis period the money market coped quite readily with whathas sometimes been a period of considerable seasonal strain.In some recent years, the advent of December dividend and taxdates has thrown a large volume of financing needs back onthe banks as dealer repurchase agreements with corporations 12/17/63ran off, forcing the dealers to turn in size to the bankswhich were at the same time experiencing direct pressurefrom increased business loans around the tax date. Thistime, the money market banks were well prepared for theseadditional demands, and perhaps even over-prepared for thedemands that emerged in the first half of the period, withthe result that the money market was unexpectedly easy.Also contributing to the facility with which the markethandled the seasonal demands made upon it this year is thefact that dealer positions and use of credit had recentlybeen running on the order of $800-$900 million less thana year ago.Later in the interval a firmer tone returned to themoney market, and yesterday--the quarterly corporate taxdate--there was evidence of some sizable pressure of thesort that had been anticipated earlier. Thus, where theSystem had been absorbing reserves through the first partof the period, in order to help restore a firmer tone, theSystem supplied a sizable volume of reserves yesterday toprovide some lubrication over the tax date itself.The temporary easing in the money market had littleimpact in the securities markets beyond the Treasury billarea. Bills edged lower in rate through the first halfof the interval and then returned to about the same levelas two weeks ago, with the three-month issue remaining ina range of 3.50-3.55 per cent. The average issuing ratesin yestercay's auction of about 3.54 per cent and 3.68 percent for the 3- and 6-month bills, respectively, were with-in a basis point of the rates two weeks ago.In the bond market, as the shock of the assassinationreceded further in time, the market gave increasing attentionto economic factors that are expected to affect interestrate. in the months ahead. In particular, attention has beengiven to the continuing indications of good business, risingloan demand, and the prospect that an early tax cut may bothstimulate business and temporarily enlarge the Treasury'sdeficit. The market has also noted the recent rise in yieldson high-grade corporate bonds. Finally, the market remainsaware that the balance of payments problem is still far fromsolved. The downward drift in prices in response to thesefactors has been quite orderly, however, with no greatpressure of selling reported.The corporate and municipal bond markets showed littlechange in price during the recent period, following thedeclines that had occurred earlier. Investors showedselective interest in new issues, with some of the larger-12- 12/17/63offerings winning only fair response. Considerableattention is focusing on two major negotiated offeringsthat are expected to reach the market today--$150million of Sinclair Oil bonds and $100 million ofBankers Trust capital notes. Rate expectations for theBankers Trust issue are in the neighborhood of 4.45-4.50per cent, while the Sinclair bonds are expected to comeat a slightly higher level.Near-term prospects for Treasury financing includethe sale of another billion dollar one-year bill,probably on December 30; replacement of the $2.5 billionmaturing January 15 bills--possibly with a like amount ofJune tax bills; and the raising of anot er $750 million--$1 billion of cash in mid-January--perhaps through a noteor short bond. Toward the end of the month, the Treasurywill choose the terms of the refunding of its February 15maturities, of which a little over $4 billion are publiclyheld.Thereupon, upon motion culy made andseconded, and by unanimous vote, the openmarket transactions in Government securi-ties and bankers' acceptances during theperiod December 3 through December 16,1963, were approved, ratified, andconfirmed.Chairman Martin then called for the staff economic andfinancial reports, supplementing the written reports that had beendistributed prior to the meeting, copies of which have been placedin the files of the Committee.Mr. Brill commented on economic conditions as follows:Optimism about the economic outlook continues toabound, in fact to increase with the apparent improvementin prospects for the tax cut. It is getting more and moredifficult these days to characterize our profession as the"dismal science."This nigh-universal optimism carries with it someobvious dangers. When everyone is convinced that thereis "no way to go but up" such an orientation can easilyspill over into attitudes towards wages and prices.Thus, even with unutilized capacity and manpower, we have-13- 12/17/63been getting continued testing of markets by businessmenthrough scattered price increases--fortunately, not all ofwhich hold--and mutterings from labor leaders about thekinds of contracts they will fight for next year.In the context of such exuberant psychology, it maybe salutary, as an antidote, to stress some of thedeviations and lapses from progress, when and where theyoccur. The wage and price stability we have enjoyed inthis expansion is explainable principally in terms offundamental supply and demand relationships, but I am surethe occasional pauses in the uptrend have also beeninfluential in preserving economic sobriety.. Hesitationsin the pace of expansion have introduced just enoughuncertainty to help keep inflationary psychology fromreviving, at least outside of the stock market and someparts of the real estate market.November can fairly be described as one such pause inthe general updrift, even if its import has not yet beenfully assimilated by the optimists. There was not mucheconomic progress last month. Industrial production edgedup only slightly, not enough to move the index out of therounded 127 level achieved in October. Retail sales alsoremained at about October levels, if one makes roughallowance for the effects of the national tragedy onNovember 22. Employment remained essentially unchangedand the unemployment rate bounced up. Constructionactivity was high but no higher than in October, andbusinessmen reported that their current spending for plantand equipment was not rising as much as they had anticipatedthree months ago and that they foresaw no rise from presentlevels in the immediate future.November developments, then, should be sobering, andeven more so if put in a somewhat longer perspective.Industrial production at 127 is, after all, only barelyhigher than the index for July. Nonfarm employment hasgrown quite moderately since July, and retail sales in,November were also no higher than mid-year levels. If itwere not for the continuing $8 or $9 billion per quartergain in total GNP, one might venture a judgment that thepause in economic expansion really began back at midyear.Momentum in the broad GNP aggregate has been maintained inlarge part by exceptional--perhaps unsustainable--increasesin both private and State and local government constructionactivity, and by a continued rise in consumer and Government.spending for services.-14- 12/17/63I would not want to overdo the contrast betweenleveling off in the industrial sector of the economy andcontinued expansion in other components of total economicactivity. We could be the victims of inadequate orinconsistent seasonal adjustments among the various measures.One should note a similar divergence between the productionindex and the broader GNP measure in the latter part of1962, which was followed by an upsurge in productionearlier this year. One should also note that in both yearsthe late summer and fall credit figures--particularlybusiness loan demands--appeared more consistent with theexpansive pattern of GNP than with the stable pattern ofthe production index.Whether the recent course of the economy actually hasbeen sidewise or moderately up may be debatable, but thisis of less importance than the clear evidence that we havenot been in a strong boom. Given only modest progress atbest, in recent months, and given still substantial marginsof unutilized resources, there does not appear to be muchreason for expecting that a tax ctt will necessarilyproduce a "bubble on a boom" of the sort we got in 1955,when rising Government expenditures were overlaid on risingprivate demands.Not that this insures us against inflationary effects.We have had earlier experience with rising price levels wellbefcre full employment or full capacity utilization wasachieved. But, as Chairman Martin recently pointed out,there also is another risk--the risk that an economy havingalready sustained a three-year expansion might not respondvigorously to a tax cut stimulus. Current evidence suggeststhat either possibility is still very much alive. It wouldbe premature, therefore, to adopt policies consistent withonly one alternative. Until the economy more clearly commitsitself to one course or another, a policy of watchful waitingcontinues to be appropriate.Mr. Holland made the following statement with regard to thefinancial situation:The financial system is deep in the throes of its usualDecember churning, and the final outcome is still uncertain.The tax date is past, but the remaining two weeks of themonth can still generate some substantial pressures, as thesharp but temporary upsurges of demand for bank credit and-15- 12/17/63reserves in the last two weeks of 1961 and 1962 can testify.To date, however, one must say that the December tax anddividend pressures had been surmounted fairly easily.First reports from leading New York City banks suggest thatcustomer borrowing on the tax date yesterday was somewhatheavier than usual, but not extraordinarily so. Bankborrowing at the discount window moved up somewhat thisweek, but up to the tax date, it was still below theaverage November level. The money market generally alsohas been in a comfortable position during most of December.Mr. Stone has already commented on a number of the factorscontributing to this result, and I would add mention of thesharp reserve redistribution from country to city banks.Underlying the immediate market factors, there seemsto me to have been some recent softening, at least for atime, of the strong pressure of credit demands upon thebanking system that was occurring earlier this fall. Bankearning assets have continued to expand in late Novemberand December, but important portions of the week-to-weekincreases at city banks have represented special financingarrangements, or additions to bank portfolios of bankers'acceptances, Treasury bills, or securities loans made whena bank found itself with temporarily surplus reserves.The more liquid of these acquisitions ought to be fairlyquickly disgorged as member bank borrowing climbs back upinto the $300-$400 million range.A counterpart to these changes in bank earning assetshas been a slowdown in bank deposit growth and reserveutilization. Seasonally adjusted required reserves againstprivate deposits have been drifting irregularly lower eversince their early November jump. Money supply appears tohave leveled off in the second half of November and firsthalf of December, following its early November bulge. Timedeposit expansion also seems to have slowed in Decemberafter the big November expansion when city banks bid soaggressively for C.D. money. Part--but only part--of thismoderation of private deposit growth can be traced totransfers to Government deposits, which have been climbingsomewhat more than usual since the end of October. But therest of the explanation must lie elsewhere. Partly it maylie in imperfections in the seasonal adjustments being used.Partly also, it may reflect a pause for some digestion ofthe sharp deposit and credit increases that have occurredsince August. Such a pause is not unreasonable to expect.We have had them before; they often have been brief, andsometimes have been succeeded by a vigorous new upward push.-16- 12/17/63If in fact that vigorous upthrust is able to reassertitself against the ebbing seasonal tides of the new year,I think an important threshold for policy will have beenreached.While the configuration of expansion in the bankingsystem was shifting, adjustments of other kinds wereproceeding elsewhere in the credit markets. In mostmarkets in which credit instruments are traded (the chiefexception being the mortgage market) interest rates havehad a tendency to show more movement in November andDecember, both upward and downward. The timing hasvaried from market to market, and the causes.of ratefluctuations have not always been the same. In theshort-term markets, the chief factors have been shiftingreserve availability and changing expectations as toofficial intentions. In longer term markets, ratemovements have been conditioned more by changing suppliesof new offerings, and, increasingly, by expectations asto the likely trend of rates in 1954.Whatever else their effects, the recent ratefluctuations in the short-term area have had the thera-peutic value of shaking up complacent market assumptionsof an official "rut" for bill rates and Federal fundsrates, and this has correspondingly broadened marketideas of the range within which rates may be expected tofluctuate under any given monetary policy in the future.This may be of explicit help next month, for it givesthe Account Manager slightly greater leeway for permittingmarket-induced fluctuations in short-term interest ratesduring the lengthy succession of forthcoming Treasuryfinancings. As Mr. Stone has suggested, the Treasuryplans to be involved in the market in some respect oranother on every day from December 30 through February 15,excepting for the reserve week from January 23 through 29.To be sure, the Treasury and market participants will needthe protection of a System "even keel" policy more duringsome of these intervals than others. But, by any stretch,the openings for any intervening change in monetary policyare uncomfortably slim.There are, it should be noted, two ways in whichmonetary policy will benefit from this concentrated Treasuryschedule. It will sweep the calendar clean of any furthernecessary Treasury offerings until the May 15 refunding. Anadvance refunding in March is a possibility, but that offeringis discretionary with the debt managers. Second, the Treasurywill be supplying a net $2 billion of longer bills to satisfy-17- 12/17/63seasonally strong investor demands, thereby moderatingthe possible downward tendencies in bill rates. Thisaddition to bill supplies is about the same amount aswas added by the Treasury during the first two monthsof 1963, but it will be concentrated much earlier in thecoming season, and should correspondingly postpone anytendency for bill rates to drop to levels that might beregarded as undesirable for policy purposes.I recognize that several of my foregoing commentssuggest the possibility that both the need and theopportunity for a further shift of monetary policy couldemerge by mid-February or thereafter. It would bepresumptuous--even foolhardy--of me to forecast such ajuncture. But this is one eventuality that the Committeewill want to watch for.Mr. Furth gave the following report on the balance of payments:The payments deficit for the current quarter will belarger than that for the third quarter but probably stillmuch smaller than for the first two quarters of the year.The October figure was revised upward by $100 millionto $300 million, owing to a reporing error of a largebank; there is nothing the Federal Reserve can do to avertsuch errors, and the resulting misinterpretations of thepayments trend--except to urge the reporting banks again,and again to be more careful.The preliminary November figure also indicates adeficit of about $300 million; this result is ratherencouraging not only because November--like October--apparently saw a net flow of window-dressing funds toCanada but also because the murder of President Kennedyprobably led to some outflow of U.S. funds.The first December week produced a very large surplus,suggesting a reflux of such volatile funds. The secondweek showed a moderate deficit but the tentative nature ofthe weekly data precludes the projection of the figures forthe second half of the month. Moreover, the next weeks willsee two types of transactions with opposite effects on theU.S. payments balance: outflows of window-dressing fundsto Europe--which have already begun--and receipts of year-endpayments on the debts owed by the United Kingdom and someother countries to the U.S. Government. Incidentially,insofar as European banks used Euro-dollars borrowed fromforeign residents rather than dollars borrowed from U.S.-18- 12/17/63residents for window-dressing, their transactions wouldnot affect the U.S. payments balance; but the dollarwould still be under pressure in European exchangemarkets as commercial banks sold the dollars to theircentral banks.The Euro-dollar market seems to have contracted inrecent months, owing both to a more critical attitude ofEuropean central banks and to the failures of financialenterprises here and abroad that had large Euro-dollarcommitments. It remains to be seen what influence, ifany, a sizable contraction would have on U.S. internationalliquidity. Withdrawal of U.S. corporate funds would reducethe U.S. deficit, as presently calculated, except insofaras the resulting rise in interest rates abroad led toincreased foreign borrowing from U.S. banks. But thewithdrawal of dollars now put into that market by foreignbankers or traders would swell the dollar holdings offoreign central banks and could thereby cause largerforeign gold purchases from the U.S. Treasury.The economic position of most foreign countriesremains encouraging. The same thing cannot be said,however, for the policies of some of the most prosperouscountries. In spite of its large payments surplus and theabsence of domestic inflation, the most liberal andinternationally-minded European nation, Germany, maintainsa level of interest rates that attracts capital from all.over the world; last summer it raised its import barriersby increasing compensating taxes levied on imports; andnow it is planning to subsidize its exports by means ofchanges in its system of tax rebates.The European Economic Community as a whole seriouslycontemplates an increase in its steel tariff, and it stillhas to decide whether its agricultural policy will or willnot be consistent with expanding world trade in agriculturalcommodities.If protectionism is going to emerge victorious fromthese decisions, the result may well be a trade war betweenthe Community and the rest of the world, with seriousconsequences for the very existence of the Community andfor the economic cohesion of the free world.A revival of beggar-my-neighbor policies in internationaltrade might well nullify the gains in cooperation achieved ininternational finance, and thereby add to the difficulties ofdefending the dollar.-19- 12/17/63Chairman Martin then called for the usual go-around ofcomments and views on economic conditions and monetary policybeginning with Mr. Hayes, who commented as follows:Nothing has occurred in the last two weeks to changeour assessment of the current business situation and out-look. Both continue to be quite favorable, even thoughthere are some uncertainties, especially with respect tonext year's business outlays on plant and equipment, andeven though the unemployment problem seems as intractableas ever. The growing indications that the tax bill willbe passed early in the year constitute an importantelement of strength. Mild upward price pressures are inevidence, particularly in industrial raw materials--butthese faint signs are still far from conclusive evidencethat a major price break-out is under way.Our balance of payments statistics continue to makedisappointing reading. The final October report now showsa deficit of $315 million, with the November figureestimated to be almost as large. Now that some detailsfor October are available, it appears that both short-termcapital outflows and a shrinking trade surplus contributedsignificantly to the deficit for that month. It isdisturbing to see the over-all deficit remain at such ahigh level despite the virtual cessation of purchases ofnewly-issued and outstanding foreign securities. Whilethe situation in the foreign exchange markets is fairlysatisfactory--except for the strength of the German markand the German balance of payments--the possibility ofrenewed pressure on the dollar is clearly present.The over-all statistics on bank credit point tocontinued rapid expansion in this series, with the $3billion gain in November the third largest this year. The7.6 per cent annual rate of gain in bank credit in thefirst eleven months of 1963 was only slightly less thanthe 8.5 per cent rate of gain for the corresponding periodof 1962. Bank loans, including business loans, againshowed substantial increases; and while part of the risein loans appears to have been attributable to specialfactors, it is hard to avoid the conclusion, especially inthe light of comments around this table at the last fewmeetings, that underlying loan demand has strengthenedconsiderably in recent months. Nonbank liquidityregistered a further sharp advance in November, with sizable-20- 12/17/63gains in both money supply and time deposits. On theother hand, it may be worth noting that in the pasttwo years the banks have materially lengthened theaverage maturity of their portfolio of Governments--sothat further loan expansion could put greater upwardpressure on long-term interest rates than has beentrue in earlier periods of loan expansion.As we consider the possible need for policymodifications in the months immediately ahead, wecannot overlook the fact that the next couple of weeksprovide perhaps greater freedom of action to the Systemthan any other prospective period until some time inMarch. The financing calendar for January is fairlyfull, and in the latter part of that month the Februaryrefinancing will be announced. This in turn may well befollowed closely by an advance refunding that willextend well into March.On most of the occasions during the past two yearswhen we have seen fit to move modestly toward lesser ease,the Committee has rightly felt some reluctance to do so inview of the then position of the domestic economy. Today,however, I think we are in a different situation. Not onlyis a further modest move in this direction clearlyindicated as desirable by the continuing balance ofpayments problem, but there also is real justificationfor asking ourselves whether the recent growth rates for.bank credit and nonbank liquidity have rot exceededoptimum levels even from a purely domestic standpoint.We have had several warnings in the market that furthercredit expansion at the present high rate may have decidedlyundesirable consequences for credit stardards. I doubtwhether any of us, when we modified policy a year ago andfive months ago, had any idea that bank credit would keepon growing as fast as it has.It seems to me highly appropriate that in the nextthree weeks we should seek to encourage a somewhat reducedrate of bank credit growth by allowing credit demands toput somewhat greater pressure on bank reserve positions.Thus, free reserves might be allowed to fall moderately--possibly to about the zero level. I can see no harm at allif the result is to push bill rates somewhat above thediscount rate--perhaps to the 3.60 per cent level--although,as seasonal pressures wane, we may have difficulty keepingthe rate much above 3-1/2 per cent. The serious balance ofpayments outlook warrants our continuing to give carefulattention to the bill rate, over and above the proposed-21- 12/17/63 -22-objective of slowing the rate of credit growth.If the Committee should agree on the soundness ofthese objectives, the second paragraph of the directivemight well be amended slightly, first to eliminate thereference to possible market unsettlement, which nolonger seems needed, and second to suggest a slightlygreater degree of firmness in the money market and aslightly slower rate of reserve expansion.Mr. Shuford said there had been no significant changes ineconomic activity in the Eighth District since the Committeemeeting of two weeks ago. For the year as a whole the District hadhad marked improvement, but there had been little change sinceAugust. Total employment in the District's major labor markets hadincreased only slightly from the high level reached in July. SinceAugust industrial use of electric power had been about unchangedand similarly with bank debits.Total loans of weekly reporting banks showed a considerableincrease from August to November with most of the increase inbusiness loans to commodity dealers and food, liquor, and tobaccoprocessors. Funds to accommodate this loan expansion had come froma net sale of securities and a growth in deposits, mainly time deposits.Noting that the national economy had been discussed fullythis morning, Mr. Shuford said he would simply mention that afterreaching a high level in mid-summer activity had increased at asomewhat more moderate rate. Industrial production recently hadbeen only slightly above its July level in contrast to a 12 percent annual rate of expansion from January to July. New construction 12/17/63 -23-expenditures, after increasing rapidly from the first of the yearto August, were down somewhat in September and October and appearedto be little changed in November. Economic strength did appear insome areas such as personal income, which in November continued thesteady rise of the past twelve months. The latest data for corporateprofits and for plant and equipment expenditures were strong.Mr. Shuford commented that monetary policy over the past yearseemed to him to have been reasonably appropriate. Committee actionshad permitted a higher level of short-term interest rates, which hadcontributed to a somewhat improved balance of payments situation. Atthe same time, policy had facilitated the improvement that had occurredin economic activity by providing reserves for a relatively rapidgrowth in bank credit and the money supply.Mr. Shuford said he agreed with Mr. Hayes that the balance ofpayments problems had not been resolved and could become more severe.It was also true that the rate of increase in the money supply duringthe past year had been high compared with other recent years and hadcontinued high this fall. However, in view of the moderate improvementin the economy, the relative stability of prices, and the moderategrowth in real product, he did not feel that monetary policy had beenunduly expansive, considering a period longer than just the past fewmonths. He thought the Committee needed to be very much on the lookoutfor evidence that monetary expansion might be leading to excessive 12/17/63 -24-total demand, but in his opinion there was no clear evidence of thisas yet. Accordingly, Mr. Shuford said, he would favor no basic changein policy now. He favored a bill rate fluctuating around the 3-1/2 percent level in response to seasonal influences both now and after theyear end, and a Federal funds rate continuing in the neighborhood of3-1/2 per cent. He thought reserves should continue to be provided ata moderate rate so as not to unduly hamper economic development. Hedid not favor a change in discount rate. With respect to the directive,he suggested omitting the phrase referring to the death of PresidentKennedy.Mr. Bryan said that Sixth District figures had been behavingabout the same as the national figures; they indicated some continua-tion of the upthrust but perhaps at a slightly decelerated rate. Ashe looked at the national problem he noted the change from a year agoin the money supply, narrowly defined. The increase seemed to him tohave been ample, and in the last three months the rate of increase hadbeen up, not down. The banks recently seemed to have been able tosupply a rather sharply increased loan demand while expanding theirinvestments. Also, liquidity in the nonbank sector had risen sharply.The net of it, Mr. Bryan said, was that he could not see on the basisof any reserve figures that the economy had been starved for reserves.On the contrary, if anything monetary policy had been slightly too easy.With respect to policy for the present, Mr. Bryan said thatDecember was not a time when the Committee could make a change 12/17/63 -25-with any confidence, and he would be inclined to favor no change. Hewould interpret. no change in terms of a target figure for free reservesof slightly over zero, but he would not object if they fluctuated backand forth around the zero point.He had noted comments at this meeting on the price level, Mr.Bryan continued; he did not view price developments with as muchequanimity as others, he said, because of the consistency of the upwarddrift that had been fairly evident in services and now had becomeevident in commodities. It seemed that some factors had been operatingto raise the price level in spite of the unemployment rate and theexistence of excess capacity. While the rate of increase in itselfdid not seem large, when it was compounded over a ten-year interval itproduced a surprising figure. Mr. Bryan concluded by saying the direc-tive should be altered by taking out the reference to Mr. Kennedy.Mr. Bopp said that during the past two weeks there had beensmall changes in the Third District which po:nted, if anywhere, to aslight imrovement in the business situation. Some areas had postedgains in manufacturing employment in November, and store sales, afterclosing out November with another relatively poor week, had picked upduring the first week of December.Two developments characterized Third District banking since thelast Committee meeting: continuing reserve pressure and a slackening ofthe recent strength in business loans. Though down from recent highs, 12/17/63 -26-the basic reserve deficit of reserve city banks was still fluctuatingaround the $100 million mark, reaching $120 million on a daily averagebasis in the week ending December 11. During the same week, countrybank borrowing was $13 million, a relat.ively high level for recentyears. Though total loans and investments were up, business loans atweekly reporting member banks had declined by $22 million. Thiscompared to a $2 million fall in the same period last year.As to policy, Mr. Bopp felt it important not to be swept awayby the extremely optimistic sentiment that seemed to prevail now.Business was better than many people had expected but optimism seemedto have out-run the facts. The pace of expansion remained moderate andwas remarkably free of the excesses which characterize booms. Theconsensus on the outlook was favorable, but the predictions continuedto indicate only moderate advances. And it was still far from a surething that bus.ness would escape a downturn next year.For these reasons, Mr. Bopp said, the Committee should notmove any further away from ease. In any case, the present period,with seasonal pressures in force, seemed an inappropriate time forsuch a move. It was important to see how vigorous business remainedduring the winter months and as action on a tax cut moved nearer.Moreover, time would reveal whether the recent improvement in thebalance of payments was temporary or not.In sum, Mr. Bopp said, he would make no change in over-allpolicy; he would not change the discount rate; and except for deleting 12/17/63 -27-the reference to President Kennedy's assassination he would make nochange in the directive.Mr. Hickman said that, as was to be expected, not much hadbeen added to the understanding of the business situation since thelast meeting of the Committee. Output continued to expand moderately.The latest projections on plant and equipment spending, as announcedby Commerce-SEC, were reassuring as to trend, although somewhatdisappointing as to level. The news of a slippage of retail sales inNovember had been anticipated, and fragnentary evidence for Decembersuggested a strong rebound. Contrary to some expectations, the pre-liminary report on seasonally adjusted corporate profits for the thirdquarter showed a rise from the second quarter.This might be a good occasion, Mr. Hickman commented, to catchup on the most recent wrinkles in the auto and steel industries. Twcschools of thought seemed to be emerging in the automobile trade--onebullish, one bearish. The bears felt that sales were not sufficientlystrong to sustain current output rates over the near future. Theyforesaw a cut on the order of 10 per cent in the production rate inearly 1964. The bulls pointed to a shift of consumer preferencetowards cars in the middle-range price bracket, coupled with the factthat inventories had been particularly tight among dealers in such cars.As more cars become available, it was argued, they would be sold, andthe current high level of output maintained. 12/17/63 -28-In the steel industry, inventory liquidation appeared to haveproceeded more rapidly than expected, Mr. Hickman reported. Ingotoutput and shipments were rising contra-seasonally and were lendingsupport to the adjusted index of industrial production. Only a monthor two ago observers had been prepared for a decline in the steelindustry, at least of seasonal proportions.Mr. Hickman said that money and credit developments of thelast two weeks had continued essentially along the lines of the recentpast except for an occasional inadvertent easing of the money market,associated, as Mr. Holland had indicated, with a maldistribution ofreserves. If the Committee was trying to maintain an invariant freereserve target of about $100 million--and he took it that such wasCommittee policy--this sort of thing was to be expected. In view ofthe touch-and-fo situation in the foreign e,.changes and uncertaintiesregarding future developments in foreign money market centers, Mr.Hickman said, any tendency towards ease, even occasionally, ran therisk of encouraging outflows of short-term funds from New York.From time to time, Mr. Hickman continued, he had been disturbedover the extent to which spokesmen outside the Federal Reserve Systemappeared to be speaking for or committing the System in its futurepolicy. For that reason, he was particularly pleased by the recentstatements of Chairman Martin and Mr. Hayes before the InternationalChamber of Commerce. It seemed to him that their words described 12/17/63 -29-accurately and forcefully the appropriate monetary policy for presentcircumstances. Furthermore, to him their statements served to reaffirmthe central responsibility of the Federal Reserve System in thedetermination of monetary policy.Mr. Daane said that before participating actively in theCommittee's policy deliberations he would like to have a chance toreorient himself on System thinking and to study the considerationsthat had gone :.nto the formulation of monetary and credit policy inrecent months. Accordingly, he would make no policy recommendationsat this meeting,.The Chairman noted that Mr. Daane had just returned from ameeting of the "Group of 10" in Paris and invited him to comment. Mr.Daane replied that he would be happy to say a word about how that Groupwas progressing and where it was heading. By way of background, henoted that at this year's meeting of the International Monetary Fundin Washington the 10 nations participating in the "General Arrangementsto Borrow" had reached an agreement described in the following quotationfrom a press release issued on October 2, 1963, by Secretary Dillon onbehalf of the "Group of 10":"In reviewing the longer-run prospects, the Ministersand Governors agreed that the underlying structure of thepresent monetary system--based on fixed exchange rates andthe established price of gold--has proven its value as thefoundation for present and future arrangements. It appearedto them, however, to be useful to undertake a thoroughexamination of the outlook for the functioning of the 12/17/63 -30-international monetary system and of its probable futureneeds for liquidity. This examination should be madewith particular emphasis on the possible magnitude andnature of the future needs for reserves and forsupplementary credit facilities which may arise withinthe framework of national economic policies effectivelyaiming at the objectives mentioned in paragraph 2.The studies should also appraise and evaluate variouspossibilities for covering such needs."The representatives of the Group to whom this study had beenentrusted had held two meetings in October during the week of theBank and Fund meetings and another meeting in Paris on November 5 and8; and had just completed still another meeting in Paris on December13 and 16. Further meetings at the ends of January and February werescheduled. The purpose of these meetings, Mr. Daane said, was for theparticipants to have full and frank discussions of their individualviews while remaining noncommittal with respect to the positions oftheir governments. It was tentatively planned to hold a week-longmeeting in Washington during the second week of April in the course ofwhich these preliminary expressions of individual views would be trans-lated into negotiations, with deputies of the Group of 10 thenexpressing the views of their governments. Under this schedule theperiod from the end of February to the second week of April would beavailable for the governments to resolve their own positions.Subsequent meetings were planned for mid-May and mid-June for thepurpose of preparing a preliminary report to be submitted to a meetingof Ministers in June, for possible review at a Ministerial meeting inTokyo in September. 12/17/63The representatives decided that their preliminary reportcould begin usefully with a review of the reasons for the exclusionfrom their discussions of two subjects--name:.y, changes in the priceof gold and fluctuating exchange rates. The Group's secretariat hadbeen asked to assemble materials for this purpose, and the U.S.representatives had contributed papers setting forth the assumptionsunderlying the exclusion of these subjects.The study itself involved three main topics: the functioningof the international monetary system, future needs for liquidity, andthe means of covering these needs. Much of the discussion so far hadbeen concerned with the functioning of the monetary system, althoughthe group had begun to get into the question of liquidity needs. Thesources of liquidity had been broken down into three components: gold,reserve currencies, and credit. As to gold, the Bank for InternationalSettlements had submitted two background papers--one on the prospectivegrowth of gold reserves and the other on cooperation among central banksin the gold market. There had been some preliminary discussion ofthese two papers at the most recent meeting, and it was expected thatthere would be wider discussion as the work of the Group progressed.As to the reserve currency component of liquidity, Mr. Daanecontinued, the deputies had been invited to submit notes on their viewsof the role of reserve currencies in the present international monetarysystem, with particular attention to how the reserve currency system-31- 12/17/63 -32-was working and whether its replacement might be desirable eventually.The U.S. representatives had submitted a paper on this subject whichhad been considered at the recent meeting along with the submissions ofother countries.Several broad currents of European thought seemed to be comingthrough, Mr. Daane said. There was considerable feeling that agreementsshould not simply be bilateral, but should come under multilateralreview. There also was considerable feeling in favor of reducing presentholdings of reserve currencies and increasing holdings of gold, andsome feeling in favor of either supplementing, or substituting for,reserve currercies by a composite reserve unit including a gold component.Mr. Daane concluded by saying that the participants in thesemeetings felt free to express their own views and tended to beprovocative in their remarks. Their statements, of course, did notcommit their governments to any particular courses of action. Hethought that the direction the study ultimately would take would bemuch clearer after the April meeting, when it would be learned howserious some of the individual country submissions were in terms ofgovernment positions.Mr. Mitchell said that it seemed to him the performance of thereal economy in the past 6 months had not been very strong, certainlynot if judged by the course of industrial production. On the otherhand, the economy had been relatively free of disequilibrating tendencies 12/17/63 -33-so that, for a lackluster performance, it had behaved desirably.The credit economy was something to which the Committee wasmore sensitive, Mr. Mitchell observed. He noted that there had beenmuch concern expressed about the quality of credit, but he had notseen any evidence that the quality of credit extended by banks haddeteriorated to the point where it jeopardized bank reserves in anysense. In any event, he doubted that it was possible in a freeenterprise eccnomy for monetary policy to do much about the qualityof credit, which depended on the nature of the many individualdecisions made by loan officers on the ground. In his judgment apolicy of restricting available funds and pushing interest rates upwould result in a detetioration of the quality of credit rather thanan improvement.On the balance of payments, Mr. Mitchell said, it was true thatthere recently had been disappointing news. However, he thought theCommittee should recognize that monetary policy would not solve theproblem except insofar as it helped to stabilize the price level. Anyeffects through short-term interest rates simply postponed the day ofjudgment, and it was a mistake to think that such rate effectsaccomplished more than this.Mr. Mitchell commented that in his opinion some of the peopleat the table were taking a rather unsophisticated view of the pricelevel and price indexes. It should not be surprising, he said, thatthe wholesale price index remained stable despite reports that many 12/17/63 -34-businesses were testing markets and trying to raise prices. As theStigler Committee had indicated, the wholesale price index utilizedprice quotations rather than prices actually charged, with the resultthat much actual cyclical movement was not reflected in the index. Inhis judgment, however, the price movement that was occurring was not ofa type to call for monetary policy action. The consumer price indexhad a different defect: it failed to take account of quality changes.He thought one could say with confidence that if such changes wereaccurately measured the index would not suggest that there had been anupcreep in consumer prices recently.Mr. Mitchell concluded by saying that on the basis of thesethoughts and on the basis of the analyses presented by the staff, hewould favor no change in the Committee's present posture. He wouldamend the directive to take out the phrase referring to PresidentKennedy's death.Mr. Shepardson said that he recognized the divergent trendsthat were mentioned in Mr. Brill's review. On the other hand, whileit seemed to him that some factors were not as exuberant as many ofthe Committee members might like, he would be inclined to give moreweight to the affirmative factors than Mr. Brill had. He would admitto taking an unsophisticated view of price developments; he sharedMr. Bryan's concern that the Committee was not giving enough attentionto the upward crawl of prices. The decline in beef prices had masked 12/17/63 -35-the rises occurring in prices of other commodities. Pressure onprices was continuing, and while some increases were not stickingothers were.There had been a constant upward movement in the consumerprice level, Mr. Shepardson continued, and this would be reflectedin wage negotiations in 1964. He agreed with Mr. Mitchell that pricelevel changes would have a significant effect on the balance ofpayments problem.With respect to the outlook, Mr. Shepardson commented thatthis season, near the year end, was not the best time to gauge thesituation. Normally there was some slackening after Christmas andit was hard to say what the next few months might show. It seemed tohim the Committee had met seasonal reserve needs fully, if not morethan fully. Required reserves continued to be above the staff guide-lines and there had been a significant run-up in the money supply.There had not been the upward pressures on interest rates oftenassociated with the Christmas season, which indicated that theCommittee had more than adequately met all needs.At thi point, Mr. Shepardson said, with the run-off thatusually started at Christmas and continued for some time afterwards,it was particularly important that the Committee not lose ground. AsMr. Hayes had mentioned, it might be difficult to work against theseasonal slack after Christmas, but every effort should be made to 12/17/63avoid any sloppiness in money markets. It was likely that theCommittee might want to take significant action in the near future,and would need solid ground for such action. He did not recommend asignificant change in policy at this time but did urge that theCommittee hold firmly to the money market conditions that it had hadrecently. It would not be undesirable for free reserves to fall tozero, and the bill rate might be held at or somewhat above its presentlevel.Mr. Robertson made the following statement:Both business and financial activity seem to havesettled back to a more moderate rate of expansion,following their more vigorous advances earlier thisfall. If this change of pace represents simply a pauseto consolidate gains preparatory to further advances, Isuppose we all would be satisfieo. If it should proveto be a lnger lasting loss of momentum, however, thereis reason for concern. We still have plenty of resourcesthat need to be put to work, and the November figure onunemployment is a harsh if somewhat unreliable reminderto that effect.I know we are all watching the price indexes closelyfor any signs of emerging general inflationary pressure,but apparently price increases in some lines continue tobe roughly counterbalanced by offsetting if lesspublicized decreases elsewhere. Presumably this kind ofhappy coincidence will have to stop some time, but I donot believe we can risk trying to forecast that timing.Three years ago, no one would have forecast that oureconomy could boost its GNP by roughly $100 billionwithout any major accompanying movement of wholesaleprices, and I think that development snould make usappropriately humble about our ability to guess how muchlonger it can go on.So long as we continue to have a noninflationaryeconomic expansion, I favor encouraging it with a broadlystimulative monetary policy. In particular, during these-36- 12/17/63days of peak seasonal pressures I would direct the Manager toprovide the reserves needed by the market without any show ofreluctance, and I would caution him not. to be premature oroveraggressive in mopping up the return flow of reservesafter the holidays.I would not think this prescription should produce anygreat and sustained interest rate decline over coming weeks,unless business activity softens, but it probably would allowfor moderately greater interest rate fluctuations downwardfrom their seasonal peak. This I think would be to the good,for it could help to dispel some of the easy assumptions aboutpegged rates that have pervaded financial circles, both athome and abroad. The market developments of the past threeweeks have, of course, been a step in this direction, and Ihope we can reinforce that lesson in the weeks ahead.All this I think can be accomplished within the confinesof the current directive. Neither domestic nor internationalconsiderations seem to call for any overt policy change; andboth the seasonal churning in the markets and the forthcomingschedule of Treasury financings provide technical argumentsagainst any change, other than perhaps to recognize these twotechnical considerations explicityly in the directive, and, ofcourse, to drop the reference to President Kennedy's assassina-tion.Mr. Mills said that the main purpose of his remarks would be toraise some heretical doubts on the handling of the transactions in theOpen Market Account that the Committee ordinarily conceived to beorthodox and conventional. He then made the following statement:Confusing developments in the mechanical conduct of Fed-eral Reserve System monetary and credit policy now cause me toconcentrate my remarks largely on technical matters. In theshort space since the Committee's last meeting, bank credithas recorded a vigorous seasonal expansion, money marketconditions, as reflected by Treasury bill yields and the rateon Federal funds, have tended to be relatively easy, and thelevel of free reserves has plodded along in a narrow rut. Itis important to call attention to the stagnancy in the freereserves factor because it belies what has been the feel andtone of a desirably easier money market, and can reasonablygive rise to charges that the System's open market operationshave practiced a deception on those market observers who lay-37- 12/17/63store on the free reserves level as a guide to its policy in-tentions.Granted the forgivable unreliability of our projectionsof movements in the supply of reserves, the actual setting ofthe average level of free reserves over a reserve week involvesno more than a last-minute arithmetical calculation by theManager of the System Open Market Account of a desired figurethen arrived at by supplying or withdrawing whatever amount ofreserves is necessary to make it come out. However, as mattershave transpired, reserves movements prior to the arithmeticalresults of these calculations are what have in realitycharacterized the tone and color of the reserve week and not therecorded free reserves figure.Application of this theory to the last two reserve weeksindicates that, in fact, reserves available to the commercialbanking system have been adequate to sustain an appropriateexpansion of bank credit. At the same time, however, thearbitrary fixing of a level of free reserves can have deceivedthe financial community. Investor confusion as to the appear-ances and realities of System policy actions may be a reason forthe somewhat slow market response to the more available supplyof reserves and the seeming buildup in the supply of Federalfunds and in the magnitude of corporate repurchase transactionswith U. S. Government securities dealers. That investors shouldbe bewildered about System policy intentions is quite under-standable and can be traced to this further step in the direc-tion of artificially controlling a U. S, Government securitiesmarket that does not develop an interest rate structureresponsive to observable changes in the quantity of reservesand the supply and demand of investment funds. The rising trendin long-term interest rates is presently a better indicator ofactual investment conditions than is to be found elsewhere inthe area of shorter term securitie. yields, but here, too,rumor and "official" statements may be influencing interestrate movements beyond the realities of supply and demand con-siderations.In the period until the next meeting of the Committee, themarket should be allowed a reasonably free rein, and anyfortuitous increases in the supply of reserves that exceedseasonal proportions should not be seized upon as an excuse toabsorb reserves and to tighten the market.Mr. Wayne reported that the limited information coming to lightin the past two weeks suggested for the most part continued improvement-38- 12/17/63 -39-in Fifth District business. Insured unemployment rates were seasonallyhigher. Contract awards rose almost to record volume in October withsubstantial strength in each major category. Scattered reports dealingwith principal manufacturing industries remained quite favorable. TheCooley one-price cotton bill was passed by the House shortly after thelast Committee meeting and was now in the hands of the SenateAgriculture Committee. Bituminous coal production and shipments hadremained at high levels. Both cotton and flue-cured tobacco estimateshad been revised upward, moderately improving farm income expectations.Turning to national conditions, Mr. Wayne said that the presentperiod of business expansion had been moderate with several changes ofpace, but generally it had avoided excesses. At least partly for thatreason it had lived to a respectable middle age. In the short periodsince the last Committee meeting there had been no major developmentsto change the moderately favorable outlook. The rise in unemploymentwas somewhat puzzling and might be slightly disturbing, but a similarrise occurred in November 1962 only to be reversed the following month.Psychologically also, there seemed to be some similarity to the situa-tion of a year ago immediately after the Cuban crisis. The rebound fromthe tragedy of a month ago, plus some indications that the President wasinducing a slightly increased tempo of action by Congress, seemed tohave produced, at least temporarily, a somewhat stronger feeling ofconfidence and optimism in the economy generally. This attitude, 12/17/63 -40-together with a record backlog of capital appropriations by corpora-tions, provided a reasonable basis for expecting that businessactivity would continue at a moderately good level in the weeksimmediately ahead.On the policy side, Mr. Wayne said, there seemed to be no signsof monetary strain or tightness in this period of seasonally intensi-fied activity. In fact, the drop in some short-term rates early lastweek to their lowest levels since midsummer suggested just thecontrary. He realized that this probably resulted from a specialcombination of circumstances, but even so he believed that Committeepolicy had been sufficiently easy to take care of seasonal needs andto allow for any sustainable growth or expansion which the economymight generate. The increases in the various categories of reservesand in the money supply in the past two or three months seemed to beample by any valid measure. Since there had been no significant changein basic conditions or prospects, Mr. Wayne said, it seemed appropriateto continue the Committee's present policy. He would favor renewingthe current directive with the elimination of the reference to PresidentKennedy's death. He did not favor any change in the discount rate atthis time.Mr. Clay commented that it was not likely that the domesticeconomy had changed in any basic way in the short interval since theCommittee last met two weeks ago. It had been a period, however, in 12/17/63 -41-which a substantial amount of economic information had becomeavailable. The significance of the additional information about theeconomy's performance and prospects was that it appeared so similar towhat it had been for a considerable span of time. Apart from theimmediate adjustments in economic activity following PresidentKennedy's death, the shape of economic events remained largelyunchanged, the pace of moderate expansion continued, the problems ofneeded expansion and underutilization of resources remained, and theevidence of a marked forward thrust in economic activity was stillelusive.Mr. Clay felt that the degree of expansion in the monthsahead would depend importantly upon the developments in the cyclicallysensitive areas of the economy, one of which was business capitaloutlays. He observed that much had been said in recent weeks aboutanticipated business capital outlays, notably following the McGraw-Hillreport, and the likelihood of a markedly better performance. Thismight yet come to pass, Mr. Clay said, but the Commerce-SEC release hadbeen sobering with respect to those expectations. Present evidenceseemed to suggest that businessmen do not foresee sufficient marketdemand for their output to justify a marked rate of expansion inbusiness capital outlays.Under the circumstances, Mr. Clay continued, monetary policyfor domestic purposes should aim to supply reserves in sufficient 12/17/63 -42-volume to permit commercial bank credit growth on a seasonallyadjusted basis. The goal with respect to the 90-day Treasury billrate might well remain within the yield range of recent weeks, whichpresumably would be appropriate for international flow of fundspurposes. Over all, these objectives probably would be compatiblewith the general monetary policy that the Committee had been pursuing.Presently, credit markets would move into the period when seasonalforces might exert downward pressure on short-term rates. It was notpossible, Mr. Clay said, to know ahead of time just how intensive thosepressures would be in any given year. Moreover, Treasury financingduring that period and market knowledge of Treasury and Federal Reserveinterest rate objectives might tend to alleviate downward interest ratepressures in those weeks.If downward rate movement beyond recent levels could not beavoided except by restricting reserve availability on a seasonallyadjusted basis, Mr. Clay observed, consideration should be given toaccepting a slightly lower level of rates temporarily. The ReserveBank discount rate should remain unchanged. He would keep the directiveas it was except for the elimination of the reference to PresidentKennedy's death.Mr. Scanlon said that business sentiment in the Seventh Districtcontinued strong, although with cautious undertones. A panel of topexecutives at a recent annual business outlook session in Chicago hadbeen uniformly optimistic. 12/17/63 -43-The Reserve Bank's recent poll of business and financialeconomists pointed to moderate economic growth in the next six monthswith Gross National Product at a rate of about $610 billion in thesecond quarter of 1964. Many of these observers believed the proposedtax cut was necessary to sustaining expansion beyond midyear.Local steel experts in Chicago, Mr. Scanlon reported, foresawa rise in consumption of finished steel from 78.5 million tons in 1963to somewhat over 81 million tons in 1964 even without inventory building.Imports were expected to be a record 5.5-6 million tons next year.United States ingot production was expected to rise from 109.5 milliontons in 1963 to 111 million tons next year. This projection assumedomestic production of.7.5 million autos in 1964, only a slight dropfrom the 7,650,000 units now expected to be produced in the currentyear. Auto production and sales continued strong; fourth quarterfigures were close to record levels and first quarter projections werebeing raised.Consumers appeared to be spending quite freely, Mr. Scanlonsaid, Aditions to savings at commercial banks and savings associationswere sharply below the year-ago rate in October and apparently inNovember as well.Seventh District banks had not shown as great a rise in loansover the past month as those of the nation. Exclusive of loans tosecurities dealers, the November rise at District banks was about the 12/17/63 -44-same as a year ago. For the second half to date, loan expansion hadbeen 4 per cent, compared with 3-1/2 per cent last year. Borrowing bycommercial and industrial firms remained strong, with a large portionof the recent increase attributable to seasonal borrowers and oilcompany property transactions. Recently demand had been sustained bythe usual borrowings related to tax and div.dend payments.The basic position of large Chicago banks had been greatlyimproved over the past three weeks, Mr. Scenlon continued. Sincedeposits were down slightly, this development reflected mainly port-folio and dealer loan adjustments.Turning to policy, Mr. Scanlon said he thought the Committee'sposture had been appropriate, but he expected that economic developmentsin the near future would call for a somewhat firmer money market thanwas provided in the Committee's current directive. He had the feelingthat, in retrospect, it may appear that the Committee should have madesuch a move now, but with the period of so-called winter lull aheadand possible adverse psychological effects cf the current widespreaddiscussion of cutbacks in Government spending, he was inclined tocontinue the current policy until the next meeting of the Committee.He thought the reference to the death of President Kennedy should bedeleted from the directive since any unusual developments in the moneymarket now probably would not be a direct result cf that event. Hewould not charge the discount rate at present. 12/17/63 -45-Mr. Deming said that 1963 was closing with Ninth Districteconomic activity continuing to expand, after allowances for seasonalvariations. There had been some drop in retail sales late in Novemberbut this seemed to have been a reaction to the President's death and thenational period of mourning. District bank debits in November were 10per cent ahead of a year ago. Preliminary estimates for Novemberfactory employment seemed favorable. Construction employment had heldup better than usual and building permit figures indicated strength inthat area. Even the iron ore picture seemed to be better, withshipments in November almost double those of November 1962 and totaltonnage so far this year running about 2 million tons or 3-1/2 per centahead of last year. Since pellet shipments had increased the ironcontent shipped this year probably was larger relative to last yearthan the tonnage figures indicated. The reason for the strong Novembershowing, Mr. Deming said, apparently was a heavier-than-expecteddrawdown of mill stocks earlier and a desire to rebuild them, whichmight augur well for steel output this winter.Fourth quarter cash farm income in the Ninth District apparentlywould be off sharply from the same period a year earlier, Mr. Demingreported. This would pull cash income for 1963 below 1962 but not bymuch, perhaps 1-1/2 per cent. The fourth quarter drop seemed to reflectsome holdup on marketings of both grain and livestock, perhaps partlyreflecting tax considerations. Thus, the prospect now was for a more 12/17/63 -46-favorable first quarter farm income picture than had been expectedearlier.Mr. Deming said the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis hadinaugurated a new sample of some 15 to 20 big manufacturers head-quartered in the Ninth District but operating nationally and, inmost instances, internationally. They were asked for information oncurrent operations both within and without the District and aboutprospects for their firms for the coming quarter. The survey was toonew to lean on heavily as yet, but four points brought out seemedworthy of note. First, current (November) figures on new orders,order backlogs, inventories, and employment indicated mostly stabilityto growth relative to October. Any declines seemed to be seasonal ordue to unusual circumstances. Second, the out-of-District figuresseemed to be more favorable than the in-District figures, which mightalso reflect seasonal factors. Third, expectations for the firstquarter of 1964 in terms of output, employment, and profits werefavorable; in fact, more favorable than current developments wererelative to these of the immediate past. Fourth, average prices forfinished products apparently showed no change in November and mostrespondents expected no change in the first quarter of 1964. Of thethree firms which expected price changes, two expected prices to riseslightly and one expected its prices to fall slightly.Turning to banking, Mr. Deming said that the statisticsindicated a much stronger than normal credit expansion in November, 12/17/63 -47-with loans sparking the expansion, but a return to normal seasonalchanges in the first two weeks of December. Deposit growth, whichwas larger than usual in November, apparently had carried over itsstrength into December. Ninth District banks did not seem to be underany particular pressure but, particularly at city banks, loan-depositratios had moved up rather sharply recently, although they were still3 or 4 points below their previous peaks.With respect to policy, Mr. Deming said he agreed with thosewho suggested there should be no basic change over the next threeweeks. As he looked at the figures in the Board staff's memorandumon reserves, he was struck by the fact. that borrowings and free reservesin October, November, and December were fairly stable, if one averagedthe weekly figures shown for each month. This, he thought, was aboutthe policy posture the Committee should be making. He would expect anupsurge in borrowings in December, and consequently lower free reservefigures. He would not be disturbed if free reserves fell below $100million--a level somewhere around $50 million seemed all right--althoughhe did not advocate operations to push free reserves down. Mr. Demingconcluded by noting that Treasury financing operations planned forJanuary and February might put some pressure on the market and in asense serve as a substitute for any additional pressure by the System.He would not change the directive except to delete the reference tothe President's death. 12/17/63 -48-Mr. Swan reported that activity in the Twelfth District seemedto be continuing at a reasonably satisfactory level. In Californiaemployment increased slightly in November but, as in the country as awhole, there were substantial additions to the labor force and conse-quently the unemployment rate rose rather sharply.Mr. Swan said he was glad to see that Mr. Brill had slightlyqualified his reference to the universal degree of optimism. He (Mr.Swan) happened to be in Seattle when cancellation of the Dyna Soarproject was announced. The reaction there had been remarkablywidespread and sharp. The cancellation means that 5,000 workersengaged on that project will be affected, and this follows a declineof about 14,000 jobs from the peak in 1962 in the aircraft industry inthe State of Washington. There was a general feeling that these jobreductions would have some secondary repercussions on the economy ofthe area, but it was too early to determine what the effects would be.Attitudes were quite different in the Spokane area, Mr. Swansaid. Conditions in agriculture, in lead, zinc, and silver mining,and even in the lumber industry provided a basis for some optimism.Mr. Swan reported that there had been no marked change in theTwelfth District's financial picture during the past two weeks. Weeklyreporting banks had shown a substantial increase in loans, although notso much as in the nation as a whole. District banks were net sellersof Federal Funds in the first two weeks of December but they expectedto be net purchasers in the current week. 12/17/63Turning to policy, Mr. Swan said that in view of the somewhatmore moderate increase in economic activity recently, the rise in theunemployment rate in November--which he found difficult to interpret--and the substantial cross-currents in the money market that probablywould continue for a time, he saw no basis for changing policy atpresent, not even to move to a slightly lesser degree of ease. Itseemed to him that in light of these factors and of the expectedreversal of seasonal pressures it would be better to wait and see whathappened through the year-end before making any decision on a policymove. He would like to see the bill rate fluctuating around the dis-count rate, presumably with free reserves in the area of $50 to $100million. He would not change the discount rate, nor would he changethe directive except to delete the reference to the President's death.Mr. Irons reported that attitudes in the Southwest were quiteoptimistic. There were a few scattered indications of furtherexpansion, but on the whole the available data were neither currentenough nor good enough to support these attitudes. Scattered commentsfrom merchants in the District indicated that they expected Christmasbusiness to be up, with some expecting a moderate increase and othersa substantial one. The various elements in the economic picture wereabout as he had reported them at the last few meetings. Activity wasat a high level and inching up, and a more substantial rate of increasewas expected.-49- 12/17/63 -50-On the banking side, Mr. Irons said, there was more evidenceof expansion. Loans were up more than seasonally at District banks,with substantial gains in commercial and industrial loans and consumerloans. The press in the District seemed to be urging people to useconsumer credit and some recent articles in the business sections ofDallas papers amounted almost to exhortations on the subject. Bankholdings of Treasury bills had risen, and bank investments generallywere up substantially in this short period. Demand and time depositsalso had risen. A few banks had been heavy purchasers of Federal funds,and a few banks had been relatively heavy borrowers from the ReserveBank. A fairly substantial increase in borrowings between now and theend of the year seemed likely.Mr. Irons noted that recently there had been a flurry ofinterest on the part of some District banks in the possible use ofcapital debentures; also, a large bank had announced that it would issuemortgage notes on its buildings and use the funds to better meet itscustomers' credit needs.With respect to policy, Mr. Irons said, he came out today atthe same place as many others; he would hold to present policy and notattempt to establish a situation of either less ease or more ease. Hethought the Committee should continue to watch price developmentsclosely, but he agreed with some of the comments that Mr. Mitchell hadmade regarding price indexes. He was particularly distrustful of the 12/17/63 -51-consumer price index as a reflector of the cost of commodities. Atthe moment, he did not feel there was a strong inflationary bias inthe economy, although one might develop, and he would not advance sucha bias as a reason for changing policy. Mr. Irons thought the presentsituation, with the bill rate around 3.50 per cent and the Federal fundsrate at 3.50 per cent, was about right. He advocated continuing tomake reserves available as needed. He favored maintaining the statusquo, more or less, until the year-end, meanwhile observing developments.He would not change the directive other than to eliminate the referenceto President Kennedy's death.Mr. Ellis said First District department store figures suggestedthat Christmas season sales this year would probably exceed those lastyear despite the shorter shopping period. Regional statistics suggestedthat the underlying tendency of the District economy was in the directionof continued upward thrust, with developments in construction, production,nonmanufacturing activity, and vacation business the most outstanding.At banks, October and November brought demand deposit totals to a levelsome 6 per cent ahead of last year. District banks had moved sharplyfrom net buyers of Federal funds in September to net sellers since.These influences had brought to an end the contraction in bank holdingsof short-term Governments and had halted the year-long rise in loan-deposit ratios. They also interrupted the decline in short-term liquidasset ratios chat began in the first quarter of 1963. 12/17/63 -52-Turning to monetary policy, Mr. Ellis said that severalaspects of the current situation inclined him in the direction ofrestraint. For example, he said, the standard analysis suggested astrongly expanding economy in its 34th month of expansion and facinganother year of substantial growth. The economy was likely to beimpelled forward by a tax reduction effective January 1. Except forconcern with the 5-1/2 per cent rate of unemployment, people would bedescribing the economic situation in glowing terms. It seemed to himthat higher minimum wages and liberalized unemployment compensationprovisions, coupled with changed attitudes toward "acceptable work,"inevitably meant a higher rate of unemployment in the economy, andexperience did not suggest that this problem could be solved by creditinjections.Since the Committee's last shift in monetary policy in July,Mr. Ellis continued, reserve expansion had materially exceeded thestaff guidelines, to the point where the rate of credit expansionmight well be considered to be unsustainable. Since July reserveexpansion had been at an annual rate of 6 per cent, while the moneysupply had increased at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 5 percent. At some point the burden of proof must shift to those whowanted to continue inflating the money supply at the current rate.Considering international capital flows, he thought it appropriate tonote that foreign lending at First District reporting banks stood 41 12/17/63 -53-per cent above the year ago level, with all of the gain occurringsince July. Fourth quarter balance of payments figures when publishedwould not be well received, and questions might be raised about theuse of monetary policy in light of these figures. Belgium, France,and Canada had all recently increased their bank rates by 1/2 percent, Mr. Ellis noted, and Sweden and Switzerland had permitted arise in market rates. The Committee had been told this morning aboutthe attractive rates prevailing in Germany.These various developments, Mr. Ellis said, suggested to himthat the next move in monetary policy should be a gradual shift towhat he would label as a neutral position. He had the feeling thatthe Committee had already crossed the threshold for policy that Mr.Holland had mentioned. He was troubled by the fact that the oppor-tunities for changing policy in the near future were slim in view ofthe Treasury financing calendar; the choice seemed to be to changepolicy now or wait until spring. He thought that now was the time tomove toward neutrality, Mr. Ellis continued, and as targets he suggesteda gradual lowering of free reserves to zero by mid-January and acceptanceof short-term rates up to 3.60 per cent with occasional fluctuationsabove that level. He would amend the directive accordingly. Inmentioning these targets, Mr. Ellis said, he was aware of the problemsthat faced the Desk during the next few weeks; it was going to take agreat deal of running even to stay in one place. 12/17/63 -54-In a concluding remark, Mr. Ellis said he accepted thepossibility that developments in the market might make discount rateaction desirable before the mid-February Treasury refunding.Chairman Martin noted that barring an unforeseen event thiswould be the last Committee meeting of 1963. He thought the Committeewas closer together in its views this morning than it had been forsome time.He recently had re-read the minutes of the meetings for thelast year, the Chairman continued, and he was inclined to think thatthe Committee, on looking back over what had been a difficult year,would feel that monetary policy had done well. In his opinion thetiming of policy actions had been good. The Committee had been rightwhen it moved to slightly less ease at this time last year. The mostdramatic policy action had been the discount rate change in the summerof this year. While judgments might differ he believed it had beenalmost essential to take that action then in view of the balance ofpayments situation that was developing. No one would know how mucheffect the discount rate change had had on the balance of paymentsbecause the interest equalization tax proposal came into the picturealmost immediately, but in his judgment the effect was salutary.Chairman Martin said he would be inclined to Mr. Scanlon'sline of reasoning if the Committee were to attempt to project intothe future, but he did not think the Committee should do so. He 12/17/63 -55-favored no change in policy at the present time for a variety ofreasons. He thought that the economy was in a period of excessiveoptimism, and such optimism disturbed him because he did not think itwas warranted by the facts. To some extent the optimism was the resultof efforts to pass the tax program; there had been a psychologicalbuildup about what could be achieved by a tax cut that wasdisproportionate to the likely consequences. Some kind of tax programprobably would be passed in late February cr early March and maderetroactive to the first of the year, but its actual impact on theeconomy remained to be seen.If the Committee made no change in policy today, ChairmanMartin continued, it would be pretty well blocked out for a long time.This was not a case of holding off until the next meeting; the changeswere that the next opportunity for action would not occur before March.If the present euphoria should be translated by a tax cut into a realsurge in the economy, the System might be faced with the need for achange in the discount rate or some other drastic action to be takenat the first opportunity. This was something the Committee shouldnot lose sight of.The whole western world was again faced with the specter ofinflation, the Chairman observed, and he was opposed to inflationbecause it led to deflation. There were those who believed thatunemployment could be cured by easy money. He doubted this; monetary 12/17/63 -56-policy had a residual influence on the unemployment problem, butbudget, fiscal, and wage-price policies had more fundamental effects.What the Committee was faced with, the Chairman commented, wasa condition of euphoria that was pushing interest rates higher thanjustified by underlying supply and demand conditions in the markets forfunds. He believed that even with the expected return flow of fundsthis situation was likely to continue into the first part of the year.He agreed with Mr. Shepardson's comment that the Committee should nctlet the situation get away from it on either side. Monetary policy hadbeen reasonably successful in assisting the domestic economy withoutinflation over the past year, and should continue to try to help theeconomy in every way it could. At the same time, it was necessary tobe cognizant of the balance of payments problem. He did not anticipatea run on the dollar, but the Committee must keep alert.In sum, the Chairman said, monetary policy had had a good year,and he thought it inadvisable for the Committee now to force its hand.A tax reduction probably was not too far off. If for any reason,however, the tax cut should be set back there would be deterrent effectson the economy, but the Committee probably would have time to face up tothis eventuality if it occurred. He thought the Committee was justifiedat this juncture in accepting the good fortune it had had with monetarypolicy to date. He favored continuing the directive as it stood exceptfor the elimination of the reference to President Kennedy's death. 12/17/63 -57-In further remarks Chairman Martin said the Committee should doeverything in its power to assess the role of monetary policy in theearly part of the new year. He thought the Committee could take acertain amount of satisfaction from developments in 1963, but the realtest would come if a tax reduction was voted. With respect to the pricesituation, he did not believe that monetary policy could control prices,but it was one factor affecting them. He did believe that prices wereon the move and the Committee could not afford to be complacent. Whilethe wholesale price index continued to hold to its earlier level, thedesire and the tendency to raise prices was quite evident in businesstoday. The Committee had to recognize that the price problem was goingto remain with it. The Committee could not ignore it and should try toreassess it.Chairman Martin said he thought the large majority of memberswere for no change in policy today, and for no change in the directiveexcept the deletion of the reference to President Kennedy. He wouldhope that at some point early in the new year the Committee would haveenough information to make a more fundamental judgment on policy, butin his opinion it did not have that information today.Thereupon, upon motion duly madeand seconded, the Federal Reserve Bankof New York was authorized and directed,until otherwise directed by the Committee,to execute transactions in the SystemAccount in accordance with the followingcurrent economic policy directive: 12/17/63It is the Federal Open Market Committee's currentpolicy to accommodate moderate growth in bank credit,while maintaining conditions in the money market thatwould contribute to continued improvement in the capitalaccount of the U.S. balance of payments. This policytakes into consideration the fact that domestic economicactivity is expanding further, although with a margin ofunderutilized resources; and the fact that the balance-of-payments position is still adverse despite a tendency toreduced deficits. It also recognizes the increases inbank credit, money supply, and the reserve base of recentmonths.To implement this policy, System open market operationsshall be conducted with a view to maintaining about the sameconditions in the money market as have prevailed in recentweeks, while accommodating moderate expansion in aggregatebank reserves.Votes for this action: Messrs.Martin, Bopp, Clay, Daane, Irons,Mitchell, Robertson, Scanlon, andShepardson. Votes against thisaction: Messrs. Hayes and Mills.Mr. Mills said he did not object to the deletion from.thedirective of the reference to the President's death, but he dissentedfrom the decision to make no change in policy for reasons that he hadcited previously. He observed that the actual experience of the lasttwo weeks with respect to availability of reserves fitted his ownjudgment of a viable and constructive credit policy but in his opinionit did not conform to the language of the directive. There would bea relatively short period from now until the next meeting during whichthere might be some temporary seasonal tightness. However, such adevelopment appeared unlikely since the weight of events seemed to betoward ease; the projected movements in reserves, the customary-58- 12/17/63 -59-early-year tencency towards credit liquidation, and the post-Christmasreturn flow of currency all tended in this direction. He did notunderstand why the Committee should be so concerned about inflation asto wish to accelerate a normal seasonal credit contraction and to producea lower level of free reserves and credit availability. He could notreconcile this with the kind of credit and monetary policy that in hisjudgment it was the responsibility of the Committee to formulate. Overthe years and particularly this year, Mr. Mills continued, he hadbecome increasingly of the opinion that monetary policy could do agreat deal more harm than good. He thought it was the tendency of theCommittee to permit its fears and concerns to lead to the harmful sideof contraction.Mr. Hayes said he favored deleting the reference to the deathof President Kennedy but he dissented from both the directive and theconsensus for no change in policy. In his judgment the Chairman hadbeen quite realistic about the matter of timing; if no change inpolicy was made at this meeting the Committee would be precluded frommaking a change for about three months. and to his mind this was unwise.Mr. Ellis had put the case for a slight move toward less ease veryably. Mr. Hayes said he had the feeling that many people around thetable saw inexorable forces leading the Committee to less.ease andhe was at a loss as to why the Committee should not make a modest stepnow to pave the way. He had hoped for action at this meeting similar 12/17/63 -60-to the action taken last December; it seemed as appropriate now asit had then.In response to a question from the Chairman, Mr. Stone saidhe did not consider it necessary to recommend any amendment to thecpntinuing authority directive with respect to the limit on the changein the aggregate amount of U.S. Government securities held in theSystem Open Market Account during any period between meetings of theCommittee.It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal OpenMarket Committee would be held on January 7, 1964.Thereupon the meeting adjourned.Assistant Secretary