 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Systemin Washington on Tuesday, October 22, 1963, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Martin, ChairmanHayes, Vice ChairmanBalderstonBoppClayMillsMitchellRobertsonScanlonShepardsonShuford, Alternate for Mr. IronsMessrs. Hickman, Wayne, and Swan, Alternate Membersof the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Ellis, Bryan, and Deming, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Boston, Atlanta, andMinneapolis, respectivelyMr. Young, SecretaryMr. Sherman, Assistant SecretaryMr. Kenyon, Assistant SecretaryMr. Hexter, Assistant General CounselMessrs. Baughman, Eastburn, Furth, Green, Holland,Koch, and Tow, Associate EconomistsMr. Stone, Manager, System Open Market AccountMr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open MarketAccountMr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of GovernorsMr. Broida, Assistant Secretary, Board of GovernorsMr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Yager, Chief, Government Finance Section,Division of Research and Statistics, Boardof GovernorsMiss Eaton, Secretary, Office of the Secretary,Board of Governors 10/22/63Mr. Coldwell, First Vice President, FederalReserve Bank of DallasMr. Rouse, Vice President and Senior Adviser,Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkMessrs. Holmes, Mann, Black, and Jones, VicePresidents of the Federal Reserve Banks ofNew York, Clevelard, Richmond, and St. Louis,respectivelyMessrs. Brandt and Litterer, Assistant VicePresidents of the Federal Reserve Banks cfAtlanta and Minneapolis, respectivelyMr. Anderson, Financial Economist, Federal ReserveBank of BostonMr. Meek, Manager, Securities Department, FederalReserve Bank of New YorkUpon motion duly made and seconded, andby unanimous vote, the minutes of the meetingof the Federal Open Market Committee held onSeptember 10, 1963, were approved.Upon motion duly made and seconded, andby unanimous vote, the action of the membersof the Federal Open Market Committee taken onOctober 8, 1963, authorizing extension of theperiod of the standby reciprocal currencyarrangement with the Bank of Italy to six monthsfrom three months but not affecting the termof any drawing by either party was approved,ratified, and confirmed.Before this meeting there had been distributed to the Committeea report from the Special Manager of the System Open Market Account onforeign exchange market conditions and on Open Market Account andTreasury operations in foreign currencies for the period October 1through October 16, 1963, together with a supplementary report coveringthe period October 17 through October 21, 1963. Copies of these reportshave been placed in the files of the Committee. 10/22/63Supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombs commented thatthe Treasury gold stock would remain unchanged this week for the tenthweek in a row. After deducting gold orders on hand, the StabilizationFund had $64 million available and this might be further increased bya prospective distribution by the Gold Pool at the end of this month.On the London market, there had been no significant sign ofdishoarding as yet, Mr. Coombs said, with private buying remaining ona moderate scale. Sales of Russian gold, of which $200 million wereacquired by the Pool during September, had continued, and the Pool hadacquired another $100 million from the same source during the firsthalf of October. So far this year, Russian gold sales had come to $400million, as compared with annual totals in earlier years of $200 to $25Cmillion. Since the Russian wheat purchase program might increase theirdollar exchange needs by $750 million or more above normal, they mightbe forced to sell gold in sizable volume during coming months.Mr. Coombs observed that the preliminary September figuresshowing a deficit of $180 million in the U. S. balance of paymentswere encouraging and seemed to reflect sharp declines in outflows ofboth long- and short-term capital. While Canada continued to attractsome short-term money, he had the impression that capital outflows toother parts of the world had subsided considerably. New York banksnow seemed to be moving to a rate of 3-7/8 per cent on 90-day moneyand thus were getting into a better competitive position with the Euro-dollar rate of 4-1/8 per cent. 10/22/63Despite the apparent improvement in the U. S. balance ofpayments, Mr. Coombs said, exchange markets had been subject to anumber of disturbing influences, mainly because of flows of Europeanfunds from one money market to another. Perhaps the most serious problemarose out of the speculative flow from the lira through the dollar intothe Swiss franc. In Italy, the present caretaker government had beenunable so far to deal decisively with a serious inflationary situation.The Bank of Italy had finally made a firm request of the Italian com-mercial banks to refrain from further borrowing in the Euro-dollarmarket. For the past year such borrowing had disguised severe deteriora-tion in the Italian balance of payments. It now seemed likely that theBank of Italy soon would be forced to show heavy reserve losses, withconsiderable risk that this would further aggravate speculative pressures.In an effort to cushion somewhat the Italian reserve declines, the U. S.Treasury had stepped up its program of acquiring lira balances againstits outstanding lira bond indebtedness of $200 million, and by the endof the month these purchases would probably amount to $67 million.Mr. Coombs thought it likely that the Bank of Italy would wantto draw on its reciprocal swap arrangement with the Federal Reservewithin a month or so. If correction of the Italian deficit in factshould take longer than the short maturities appropriate to swap drawings,the Bank of Italy would probably move to pay off any drawings under theswap line by recourse to the International Monetary Fund for longer 10/22/63 -5-term credit. At the moment Italy had a sizable creditor positionwith the Fund and also was negotiating a substantial increase in itsFund quota. There seemed to be a reasonable chance that the increasewould be approved before the year end.Unfortunately, Mr. Coombs continued, as banker to the worldfinancial system the U. S. was involved not only in the Italian deficitbut also in its counterpart, the heavy flow of short-term funds fromItaly to Switzerland. Last week the Swiss National Bank had to makefurther sizable purchases of dollars to keep the dollar from goingthrough the floor at 4.3150. To mop up these surplus dollars, theAccount had to exhaust the $100 million swap line with the Bank forInternational Settlements by a further drawing of $20 million, and onthe day preceding this meeting the Account had drawn $30 million underthe $100 million swap line with the Swiss National Bank. Consequently,there remained only $70 million under the swap line with the SwissNational Bank to deal with possible heavy further flows of dollars toSwitzerland before the year end, including forward Treasury contractsof $110 million maturing in that period. He had discussed the situationlast week in Basle with representatives of the Swiss National Bank, Mr.Coombs said, and had secured a tentative agreement from that Bank totake on an additional $70 million in Swiss franc bond issues by theU. S. Treasury. He thought the Swiss National Bank would also do itsbest to help out around the year end by executing swaps with Swiss 10/22/63 -6-commercial barks to take care of year-end inflows for "window-dressing"purposes. But unless the Italian authorities take drastic action torestrain the outflow of funds from Italy, the Account might have todraw heavily on its remaining credit source, the unused $70 millionof the swap line with the Swiss National Bank. And in the backgroundwas the specter of real trouble on the British side; uncertaintiesassociated with anticipated British elections could result in stillfurther flows to Switzerland. Therefore, it might become desirableto increase still further the System's swap lines with the BIS andSwiss National Bank.Mr. Coombs said that the System was faced with another trouble-some problem in the Netherlands. In late September it had beennecessary to draw on the full swap line of $100 million with theNetherlands Bank, and the U. S. Treasury had put out $39 million irone-month guilder forward contracts, to deal with a sizable repatriationof funds by Dutch commercial banks. The main reason for that inflcwwas rumors of a re-evaluation of the guilder. These rumors had sincebeen officially denied, but a new type of speculative situation hadarisen. Dutch commercial banks now expected a severe tightening ofcredit to deal with the inflationary consequences of an expected wageincrease of 8 to 10 per cent. Consequently, the Dutch banks were tryingto stay liquid, and so far it had been possible to cover only $13 millionof the Treasury's $39 million in one-month forward contracts. It was 10/22/6.3 -7-paradoxical, Mr. Coombs observed, that a prospective 8 to 10 per centwage increase should result in a strengthening rather than a weakeningof the currency of the country involved. It seemed reasonably likely,however, that the prospective deterioration in the Dutch competitiveposition would in due course tend to weaken the guilder. But if sucha reversal was unduly delayed by restrictive credit policy, it mightbe necessary to consider funding our swap drawing through a U. S.Treasury issue of guilder bonds to the Netherlands Bank. While theDutch authorities so far had resisted taking in such bonds, at thelast BIS meeting they seemed prepared to consider this possibilitymore favorably.In the discussion that followed, Mr. Mills inquired about thenature of the allocation of increments to the stock of gold in theLondon Gold Pool, and the reasons for the reallocations to othercountries of parts of the U. S. share that he understood the Treasuryrecently had made. Mr. Coombs noted, in replying, that the UnitedStates normally received 50 per cent of any allocation by the PoolOn the occasion of one allocation, last spring, the Treasury hadretained half of its share and reallocated the other half to the GermanFederal Bank and the Bank of Italy. In another allocation near theend of September, $10 million of the U S. share of $85 million had beenreallocated to the German Bank and $10 million to the Italian Bank.In the middle of October, $10 million of a $40 million U. S. allocationhad been reallocated to the German Bank. 10/22/63Mr. Coombs observed that the motive for these reallocationswas not simply generosity. Both Germany and Italy, he observed, hadrarely bought gold from the United States, but rather had relied onthe London market. Thus, when they joined the Pool they were deprivedof a source of gold, and in the absence of occasional reallocationsboth the German Federal Bank and the Bank of Italy would have comeunder pressure to supplement their gold stocks by purchases from theUnited States. On balance, Mr. Coombs believed, the U. S. had savedrather than lost gold by the procedure that had been followed.Mr. Mills then asked whether the public reaction to theannouncement of the increase in the Italian swap line to $250 millionwas favorable or perverse in the sense that it provoked further outflowsof funds from Italy. Mr. Coombs replied that, insofar as he couldjudge, there had been little or no reaction of any sort; he thoughtmatters were now at a stage where the swap network was taken for grantedand occasional increases in the size of particular lines were viewedas routine changes. Had there been a reaction, he would have expectedit to be favorable.In a further question, Mr. Mills asked about the ultimateemployment of the funds that had been moving from Italy to Switzerland,and, in particular, whether the funds were being held in Swiss francs.Mr. Coombs replied that no one really knew the answer to this question,but there was reason to believe that some of the funds remained in 10/22/63 -9-Switzerland and some were reinvested in Italian securities underSwiss names. In response to another question by Mr. Mills, Mr. Coombscommented that the earlier "gentlemen's agreement" between the SwissGovernment and Swiss commercial banks limiting the extent to which thelatter acquired foreign currencies had recently been abandoned, becausethe many loopholes in the agreement served to penalize the largercommercial banks. Mr. Mills asked whether the situation with whichthe agreement had been intended to deal had recently become increasinglyserious, and whether it had not been aggravated by the fact that theU. S. was now "picking up the check" under its currency operations.Mr. Coombs replied that problems of this type were unavoidable for anynation, such as the United States or the Urited Kingdom, that was castin the role of banker to the world. He thought in the absence of theswap network the United States would have lost about $400 million in goldto Switzerland and the Netherlands in the past two months. Moregenerally, he felt that the whole international payments system hadbeen held together by these swap arrangements and by the so-calledRoosa bonds; had they not been developed the system might well havebroken down completely by now.In response to a question by Mr. Mitchell as to why the Swissauthorities did not finance the Italian deficit directly withoutinvolving the dollar in such a way as to bring it under pressure inSwitzerland, Mr. Coombs reported that on one occasion in the past the 10/22/63 -10-Swiss had acted in this manner for a perioc of two or three monthswith respect to the British pound but that they were disinclined todo so at. present with respect to the lira on the grounds that the flowsinvolved were large, and they needed to save their ammunition. Never-theless, he felt the Swiss were moving gradually towards accepting theirresponsibilities to the international payments system. Mr. Mitchellcommented that while he was not interposing an objection to the potentialItalian drawing under the newly expanded swap line, he thought the recordshould show what had been happening in the Italian economy recently. Henoted that in the past year there had been a 25 per cent increase incommercial bank credit; an 18 per cent expansion in the money supply;a 30 per cent rise in imports; a 17 per cert increase in hourly wagerates in manufacturing; increases of 6.6 per cent and 5 per cent,respectively, in the consumer and wholesale price indexes; and alongwith all this, an increase of less than 10 per cent in industrialproduction. In his view, inflation had a very strong hold in Italy;nevertheless, the System was about to extend them a substantial amountof credit with no strings attached. In reply, Mr. Coombs observed thatthe essential fact was that the credit being extended was short-term.If the Italians required long-term credit, as he thought they eventuallymight, they would have to borrow from the International Monetary Fund.In reply to a question by Mr. Deming about the implications ofrecently reported Russian gold sales in the Middle East, Mr. Coombs said 10/22/63 -11-that these sales were almost invariably for dollars. Most Russiangold sales were made in London, Zurich, and Paris; however, the RussianGovernment had recently opened a bank in the Middle East, and might bechanneling scme gold there.Thereupon, upon motion duly madeand seconded, and by unanimous vote,the System Open Market Account transactionsin foreign currencies during the periodOctober 1 through October 21, 1963, wereapproved, ratified, and confirmed.Mr. Coombs said that before making his recommendations hewould like to report on several informal conversations he had hadrecently with foreign central bank officials regarding their attitudetowards the present swap arrangements. From conversations with officialsof the Bank for International Settlements, he thought they would probablyfavor a further sizable increase in the $100 million swap line iffurther heavy flows of funds into Switzerland made this desirable.Secondly, the Swiss National Bank probably would also favor an increasein the System's $100 million swap line with them to perhaps as much as$200 million, if necessary. Third, he gathered that the Bank of Franceat present would not welcome a suggestion by the Federal Reserve for afurther increase in the swap line with them. However, their attitudedid not appear to be based on any fundamental philosophical convictionsand might change rather quickly.Mr. Coombs recommended renewal on a three-month basis of the$250 million swap arrangement with the German Federal Bank and of the 10/22/63 -12-$100 million swap line with the Bank of France, both of which werelast renewed on August 6, 1963.Renewal of the swap arrangements fora further three-month period was approved.Mr. Coombs then referred to the discussion at the precedingmeeting of the possibility of a standby swap arrangement with theBank of Japan, and said he was inclined to recommend a swap in theamount of $103-$150 million. He felt that the memorandum that had beenprepared undec Mr. Young's direction on the Japanese situation pointedup the effectiveness with which the Japanese authorities had respondedin recent years to challenges posed by inflationary pressures and toother problem:. (Note: A copy of this memorandum, dated October 18,1963, has been placed in the files of the Committee.) His conversationswith Bank of Japan officials gave Mr. Coombs the impression that theywere prepared to move fast to meet any new difficulties. He also hadobtained the impression that if they drew on a swap line and haddifficulty in reversing it, they would have no hesitancy in approachingthe International Monetary Fund. He noted that the Japanese were makingfurther progress in removing restrictions on current account transactionsand thought it probable that they would qualify for Article VIII statusby next spring. While so far the Committee had refrained from makingswap arrangements with countries that did not have Article VIII status,Mr. Coombs thought there were certain advantages in anticipating the 10/22/63 -13-event in the Japanese case. There was apt to be much publicdiscussion of the problem of international liquidity during thecoming months, in connection with which the System might be asked toexplain the details of its swap arrangements. Accordingly, he thoughtit advisable to move quickly to round out the swap network.In response to a question as to whether a condition wascontemplated under which drawings under the swap arrangement would notbe made until Japan had achieved Article VIII status, Mr. Coombs repliedthat he thought the Japanese would be fully agreeable to such a condition.The basic advantage of the swap arrangement, he noted in response toanother question, was that it would increase Japan's internationalliquidity. He thought the arrangement would minimize internal pressureson the Japanese authorities to increase their gold ratio from its lowpresent level of 17 per cent.Mr. Mills said he felt that the staff memorandum on the Japanesesituation was somewhat overdrawn as to the extent of Japan's progressand the effectiveness with which the authorities there had dealt withtheir problems. He thought the Japanese economy had been sustainedvery largely by borrowing on both short- and long-term, and asked whetherdrawings under the proposed swap agreement might not serve simply as asubstitute for the private capital inflows the Japanese had enjoyed inrecent years. Mr. Coombs replied that in his opinion the swap arrange-ment was not a substitute for long-term capital. It was a short-term 10/22/63 -14-facility, and if the Japanese needed long-term money, they would haveto find it elsewhere.Mr. Mills' second comment related to the suggestion that theswap arrangement be approved on a conditional basis, to be effectiveonly when the Japanese achieved Article VIII. status. He doubted thatthis was wise, and felt that any such arrangement the System mightmake with the Japanese should be clean-cut and without conditions. Mr.Coombs replied that he had felt hesitant on this point. As he hadnoted, the Japanese were prepared to accept the condition, but hepersonally would not urge it. He was interested in knowing how stronglythe Committee felt about a foreign country's having Article VIII statusas a prerequisite for a swap arrangement with the System. In his view,the main criterion was the importance of the country in world trade andfinance, and Article VIII status had served merely as a convenient ruleof thumb. On this basis, the Japanese would qualify. Moreover, theywere very close to full convertibility, with the main remainingrestriction relating to tourist travel, and completion of the swapagreement might encourage them to move more rapidly to Article VIII status.Mr. Bopp commented that approval of a swap arrangement with acountry that had not yet achieved Article VIII status--which to himrepresented one important criterion out of several--might open the doorto negotiations with other countries whose currencies were not convertible.He was inclined to feel that it would be desirable to include the condition, 10/22/63 -15-and perhaps also to postpone announcement of the swap arrangementuntil the date Japan achieved Article VIII status.Mr. Robertson received an affirmative reply to his question asto whether a reciprocal currency arrangement with the Japanese wouldround out the swap network, insofar as Mr. Coombs could judge at themoment. Mr. Coombs said he had thought of informally conveying theimpression that the swap network was now complete on a geographic basis.A formal announcement to this effect might prove embarrassing later, ifthe Committee should decide to broaden the network, but he agreed thata statement with some such qualifying phrase as "complete for the timebeing" might be desirable. After this discussion, Mr. Robertsoncommented that the only purpose he could see for including a conditionin the Japanese agreement was to lend credence to the notion that theSystem was prepared to deal only with Article VIII countries, and he didnot think this desirable. Moreover, to impose a condition that might notbe met until rext spring really amounted to accomplishing nothing atpresent.Mr. Balderston said that he favored the Japanese swap arrargementfor two reasons: Japan was one of this country's best customers in theworld market, and could purchase gold from the United States if soinclined. He was troubled, however, on how to draw the line if andwhen other countries proposed swap arrangements with the System. Mr.Coombs commented that this problem had been in his mind when he suggested 10/22/63 -16-that the Committee should not make Article VIII status a prerequisitefor swap arrangements. There were several other countries with suchstatus with whom he thought swap arrangements would be undesirable.because they failed to meet the more basic criteria he had mentioned,and because they did not participate in various other arrangements ofmajor industrialized countries, such as the Organization for EconomicCooperation ard Development and the "Group of Ten."Mr. Scanlon commented that if the Committee approved a swaparrangement with the Japanese without making it conditional onArticle VIII status, it seemed to him that the underlying rationale wasbeing changed. As he read the record, the Committee had treated ArticleVIII status as virtually a requisite for swap arrangements. However,he shared Mr. Robertson's feeling that if the Committee was going toimpose conditions it was really accomplishing little in authorizingthe arrangement.Mr. Mitchell observed that the original purpose of the swaparrangements had been to help shore up the dollar, and he felt theyhad been helpful in this respect. But it now appeared to him thatthe System was in the position of creating Federal Reserve funds toassist countries with trade deficits supported by short- and long-termborrowing. The Japanese position, in his view, was quite weak. He hadno fundamental objection to the act of borrowing on short term for long-term purposes--there were many legitimate instances in which such a 10/22/63 -17-procedure was followed--but he felt the United States had enoughproblems of its own without undertaking to help the Japanese withtheirs. He agreed that there necessarily was a certain element ofmutuality in swap arrangements, but felt, nevertheless, that approvalof the Japanese swap arrangement would be a mistake. Despite recentgains, the international position of the United States was not strongenough for this country to undertake to solve the problems of Japanand Italy. If the arrangements were truly reciprocal, he would expectto see them developed between pairs of third countries, rather than allemanating from the United States.Mr. Coombs commented in reply that he could visualize theeventual development of a broad network of bilateral swap arrangementsof the sort Mr. Mitchell mentioned, and thought that central bankers insome other countries were thinking along this line. He would be pleasedto see such a network come about. But., he noted, the United States wascast in a special role as banker to the world. He thought of the proposedJapanese arrangement as providing Japan with the same type of defenseas the United States had repeatedly needed. He had continually stressedthe two-way street aspect of these arrangements. To him they representeda mutual defense, under which credit would be extended when needed byeither party. Mr. Hayes added that capital flows between the UnitedStates and Japan could move in either direction, and the existence of aswap arrangement with Japan might prove highly useful to the UnitedStates in the future. 10/22/63 -18-Mr. Hickman questioned the proposed size of the swap line,and asked whether $200 million might not be a better figure than $150million, in view of the possibility of large and violent swings inJapan's external flows. Mr. Coombs agreed that a larger line mightbe found necessary, but in view of various uncertainties he thoughtit might be prudent to start with the lower figure, and increase itif experience indicated that it was too small.Chairman Martin said that he saw a real advantage in roundingout the System's network, although without necessarily saying that itwas closed for all time. He saw no particular advantage or disadvantagein this case to Article VIII status as a condition; in any event, theJapanese were close to full convertibility He then proposed that theCommittee vote on an arrangement with Japar. in the amount of $150million,without conditions relating to Article VIII status.Thereupon, upon motior duly madeand seconded, approval was granted to thenegotiation of a standby reciprocal cur-rency arrangement with the Bank of Japanin the amount of $150 million.Votes for this action: Messrs. Martin,Hayes, Balderston, Bopp, Clay, Robertson,Scanlon, Shepardson, and Shuford. Votesagainst this action: Messrs. Mills andMitchell.Mr. Mills indicated that his reasons for dissenting from thisaction went beyond the particular case of Japan. They reflected hisdesire to crystallize within the Committee awareness of what he felt 10/22/63 -19-to be a serious and dangerous drift towards greater laxity in Systemforeign currency operations.Mr. Coombs' final recommendations concerned the amounts andform of the dollar limitations specified in the continuing authoritydirective on foreign currency operations. First, he proposed thatthe limit on total foreign currency holdings be revised upward to $1.95billion from its present level of $1.75 billion, to reflect theCommittee's action at the meeting of October 1, 1963, authorizing in-creases in the size of the standby reciprocal currency arrangementswith the German Federal Bank and the Bank of Italy, and the Committee'saction at this meeting authorizing an arrangement with the Bank ofJapan. The figure of $1.95 billion was the sum of the amounts thathad been specified by the Committee for all of the individual authorizedswap arrangements, and therefore represented the maximum of Systemcovered holdings of foreign currencies under these arrangements, in theremote possibility that they might all simultaneously be fully drawn on.Secondly, he proposed that the Committee specify separately a limit of$150 million for foreign currencies purchased outright, on a spot basis.Finally, he proposed continuation of the limit of $150 million that theCommittee had approved at the meeting of October 1, 1963, for forwardtransactions undertaken for the three purposes specified in the directive.In response to a question as to whether a $150 million limitwas appropriate for spot purchases of foreign currencies, Mr. Coombs 10/22/63noted that since such transactions were on an uncovered basis therewas an exchange risk involved, and he thought the Committee would wantto keep them under close control. Asked whether the proposed limitdid not represent a loose rather than tight rein, Mr. Coombs indicatedthat the volune of uncovered holdings in the past had sometimes reachedlevels of $50 or $60 million. If the Committee wanted to set thelimit at $100, or even $75, rather than $150 million, there probablywould be no great problem posed in operations. No member, however,pressed for a limit lower than $150 million.Accordingly, upon motion duly madeand seconded, and by unanimous vote,the continuing authority d:.rective forSystem foreign currency operations wasamended, effective immediately, to readas follows:The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is authorized anddirected to purchase and sell through spot transactions anyor all of the following currencies in accordance with theGuidelines on System Foreign Currency Operations reaffirmedby the Federal Open Market Committee on March 5, 1963, asamended May 28, 1963; provided that the aggregate amount offoreign currencies held under reciprocal currency arrangementsshall not exceed $1.95 billion equivalent at any one time, andprovided further that the aggregate amount of foreign currenciesheld as a result of outright purchases shall not exceed $150million equivalent at any one time:Pounds sterlingFrench francsGerman marksItalian lireNetherlands guildersSwiss francsBelgian francsCanadian dollars-20- 10/22/63Austrian schillingsSwedish kronorJapanese yenThe Federal Reserve Bank of New York is also authorizedand directed to operate in any or all of the foregoingcurrencies in accordance with the Guidelines and up to acombined total of $150 million equivalent, by means of:(a) purchases through forward transactions, for thepurpose of allowing greater flexibility incovering commitments under reciprocal currencyagreements;(b) purchases and sales through forward as well asspot transactions, for the purpose of utilizingits holdings of one currency for the settlementof commitments denominated in other currencies;and(c) purchases through spot transactions and salesthrough forward transactions, for the purpose ofrestraining short-term outflows of funds inducedby arbitrage considerations.Before this meeting there had been distributed to the membersof the Committee a report covering open market operations in U. S.Government securities and bankers' acceptances for the period October 1through October 16, 1963, and a supplementary report covering theperiod October 17 through October 21, 1963. Copies of these reportshave been placed in the files of the Committee.In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Stone commentedas follows:Perhaps the major development since the last meeting ofthe Committee has been the note of caution that has creptinto the Government securities market and the corporate andmunicipal bond markets. This more hesitant tone has been 10/22/63particularly evident in the Treasury bill market, with therate on three-month bills in the auction yesterday at about3.49 per cent, up 8 basis points in three weeks, while thesix-month issue, which averaged 3.63 per cent yesterday, isup 12 basis points. In considerable measure, of course, theupward pressure on bill rates has been the consequence of thesubstantial addition the Treasury is making to Treasury billsupplies. Today's auction of a $1 billion bill strip followsthe offering earlier this month of $2.0 billion March taxanticipation bills and two earlier monthly auctions of $1billion one-year bills. Even with the pay off at maturityof the October 15 bills, the Treasury has added $2.5 billionto bill supplies during the past two months, and the marketfully expects the monthly offering to add another billion nextweek. The market has not been prepared to absorb theseadditional supplies of bills at pre-existing rate levels, andrates have therefore moved up to a range where the additionalbills can be absorbed.At the same time, market participants have become some-what apprehensive about the general economic background andits implications for interest rates. Continuing signs ofstrength in the domestic economy, the rise in stock pricesto record heights, and a sprinkling of price increases haveall contributed to increasing caution. Moreover, the appearanceof somewhat lower free reserve figures during the recent periodhas led some market participants to question whether policymight be undergoing a slight shift toward less ease.The rise of the bill rate to the neighborhood of 3-1/2 percent in response to these factors has given rise to somediscussion of the possibility of a discount rate increase sometime before the end of the year. In the circumstances, dealershave taken advantage of good demand from corporate and othercustomers at the higher rate levels to reduce their total billposition,. by $400 million to $2.1 billion over the three weeksended last Friday despite their awards of $2.8 billion billsduring the period. Given the uncertainties in .the background,however, dealers have found investors primarily interested inshorter bills so that their holdings of longer bills haveactually increased despite efforts to dispose of them at higherrates.The prices of Treasury notes and bonds have been slidingfor most of the past three weeks in response to the same back-ground factors that have affected the Treasury bill market.Market participants, at the time of the last meeting of theCommittee, still expected that prices would move up and that-22- 10/22/63they could dispose of their large holdings of the issuesacquired in the September advance refunding at risingprices. Subsequently, with the development of the morecautious attitude I have already noted, dealers and othershort-te:m holders of the 4 per cent bonds of 1973 and 4-1/8per cent bonds of 1989-94 sought to take some of the profitsthey already had in these issues. Large scale purchases byTreasury investment accounts helped to relieve some of thedownward price pressures that developed early in the period.Subsequently, with Treasury accounts largely out of themarket, prices moved progressively lower as investment buyingdid not fully take up offerings by dealers and others atexisting prices. Over the period, however, dealers were ableto reduce their holdings of bonds in the 5- to 10-year areaby over $300 million to about $100 million and bonds in theover 20-year area by $125 million to about $150 million.Prices in the corporate and municipal bond markets havetended slightly downward over the past ten days or so,reflecting the same background factors that have been atwork in :he Government securities market. A buildup in thecalendar of forthcoming corporate issues has exerted arestraining influence in that market, while a sizable volumeof offerings and an accumulation of municipal bonds ondealers' shelves has led to a little heavier atmosphere inthat sector in the last few days.The Treasury plans to announce tomorrow the terms onwhich it will refinance its $7.6 billion of November 15maturities, of which we hold about $3.9 billion. It alsoplans to announce tomorrow another issue of $1 billion one-year bills, to be auctioned next week and to be paid for onNovember 4. For the November 4 refunding, the Treasury isconsidering whether to offer one or two issues. If it doesoffer two, the longer option will probably mature within 5years. We would plan to take the shorter of the two optionsunless some good reason to the contrary should arise.At the last meeting the Committee raised the leeway to$1.5 billion since the projections pointed to the possibilitythat we might have to absorb close to $1 billion of reserves.As it turned out, the projections were considerably wide ofthe mark, and we absorbed substantially less than the figuressuggested would be necessary. Looking ahead, the estimatessuggest that we may have to supply nearly $1 billion reservesover the next three weeks. This time, the figures could beright, or could be wide of the mark in the wrong direction.I should therefore like to suggest that the leeway beretained at $1.5 billion for another three weeks.-23- 10/22/63 -24-In the discussion a question was raised as to whetherGovernment securities dealers had suffered losses in connection withthe recent Treasury financing operations, and whether any such lossesmight discourage their participation in the forthcoming Treasuryfinancing. Mr. Stone replied that he did not think dealers hadsuffered losses. At one point dealers had profits of 3/8 point inthe 4-1/8 per cent bonds of 1989-94, acquired in the September advancerefunding, and they had taken profits at declining prices as theyreduced their positions. As for Treasury bills, while the cost ofmarginal funds from New York banks had beer relatively high, at 3-7/8per cent, dealers had been able to borrow a good deal of nonbank moneyat 3-1/2 per cent, and, in his opinion, the average cost of funds waslow enough for them to carry their portfolios without loss.Thereupon, upon motion duly madeand seconded, and by unanimous vote, theopen market transactions in Governmentsecurities and bankers' acceptances duringthe period October 1 through October 21,1963, were approved, ratified, and confirmed.The Chairman then called for staff economic and financial reports,supplementing the written reports that had been distributed in advanceof the meeting, and copies of which have been placed in the files ofthe Committee.Mr. Koch presented the following statement on economicdevelopments: 10/22/63There have been some surprises in recent economicnews, but by and large--taking account of both the goodand the bad--developments have been in line with expecta-tions of further moderate expansion in the closing quarterof the year. Pervasive influences making for ups and downsover a wide range of indicators have been steel and autodevelopments. When discounted for adjustment to earlierstock accumulation in steel and for the model changeoverin autos, fluctuations have not been as significant as theyappear at first glance.The bad news for September was a sharp and widespreaddecline in retail sales, perhaps attributable in part todifficulty in making appropriate adjustments for seasonalinfluences. The more or less neutral news included littlechange in the unemployment rate and in industrial production.There was a cessation in the decline in steel activity, littlechange in output of other materials, a turnup in autoassemblies, and a sharp rise in truck production.Other good news for September included moderate increasesin employment and personal income, a 4 per cent rise in neworders for durable goods, and a jump in housing starts. Butthe employment increase was heavily concentrated in State andlocal employment of teachers, reflecting the beginning of thenew school year, and in the auto industry. The rise in theaverage workweek in manufacturing was similar to last year,and reflected mainly the pickup in auto output. The rise innew orders was general, but in quanti,:ative terms much of itrepresented autos, steel, and defense. The September levelof housing starts is very large indeed, but the figure forAugust has been revised down sharply, and the average of thetwo months is not much different from that of preceding months.For the third quarter as a whole, the gross nationalproduct is estimated by the Council of Economic Advisers tohave increased by about $9 billion, to an annual rate of $588-1/2billion. This is a significantl, larger increase than had beengenerally anticipated. The sharper than expected rise camemainly in the private investment sector, with residential andother construction and producers' durable equipment all up.One surprise here, considering the working off of steel stocks,is the fact that inventory investment is tentatively estimatedat about the same rate as in the second quarter. State andlocal spending showed an unusually large advance, as roadconstruction spurted following a spring decline.In early October, total retail sales appeared to be wellalong in recovering the sharp September loss. Auto sales werein very large volume--above a year earlier--but these sales-25- 10/22/63are still greatly influenced by early model year fleet sales.Press reports suggest, however, that public acceptance of thenew models has been highly favorable. Steel production hasrisen slightly but is still only at a level a little over60 per cent of capacity. The industrial production index willget some help from auto and steel production this month, butsince the.direct impact of steel and autos on the total indexis small, the course of the total will depend mainly on whathappens in the rest of industry, about which as yet we knowalmost nothing.Taken together, a sizable further rise in the GNP islikely in the current quarter. Nonetheless, it appears unlikelythat the unemployment rate will decline significantly or thatmuch additional pressure will be put on industrial capacity.Current indications are that expansion will carry overinto 1964. First, there is the likelihood of the substantialtax cut to stimulate spending, although legislation may notbe enacted until next year. Secondly, the first two surveysof anticipated business plant and equipment outlays in 1964,those by Lionel Edie and McGraw-Hill, the results of which arestill confidential and in part incomplete, suggest thatexpenditures next year are likely to be 5 to 8 per cent higherthan those for this year as a whole and also somewhat higherthan those for the fourth quarter of this year.As for the price situation, there have been some obviousstirrings since last spring. Certain important lines ofbusiness that have long felt the need but not the ability toraise profit margins now find that the demand for their productis strong enough to enable them to test selective price increases.Thus far, however, stability has persisted in the broad priceindices. The real question about the recent stirring is whetherthe selective price increases that have developed to date arelikely to cumulate and to contribute significantly to a price-cost spiral.The evidence on this question is not yet in, and probablywon't be in for some time. While prices of some commodities haveincreased in recent months, prices of a much larger number havebeen stable and prices of still others have declined. In a fewcases, a price increase was announced by a single producer andthen subsequently rescinded when his lead was not followed bycompetitors. Finally, there are some relevant longer run factsavailable that suggest that a cumulative upward spiral is not alikelihood unless the economic expansion picks up speedsignificantly.-26- 10/22/63In the first place, productivity continues to increasesharply, which is unusual after 30 months of cyclicalexpansion. Secondly, profits are apparently risingconsiderably, and there is still ample unutilized plantcapacity in most lines. Thirdly, wage increases continue tobe moderate. Moreover, for the short run it is importantthat wage contracts in some of the strategic industriescannot be reopened soon, for example, in autos not untilnext summer and in steel not until early 1965.The current level of unemployment is also still apt tobe an important restraining factor in wage negotiations.Labor is not likely to attempt to push up wages sharply ina period when it considers its bargaining position unfavorable.All this could, of course, be upset in the longer run, for ifprices and profits continue to rise, labor would no doubt seekmore aggressively to obtain what it considers its fair shareof the over-all gains.Mr. Holland presented the following statement on financialdevelopments:In the past month or so, markets have been accommodatingthemselves to the onset of fall financial pressures, punctuatedby significant Treasury financing actions in both the long- andthe short-term segments of the market. In the process,'interestrates across the board have edged up 5 to 10 basis points, andfree reserves have worked lower.Watching these lower free reserve figures emerge day byday, I cculd not help but be struck with several factors.First is the tendency among some larger banks to be quicker tocover their marginal reserve needs at the discount window.Such a tendency may reflect the stronger loan demand they areaccommodating, the higher level of market interest rates relativeto the discount rate, or perhaps some one or a combination ofother factors. But the result has been to lower the level offree reserves that is associated with a given degree of tensionin the central money market. In addition, the recent lower freereserve figures reflect a succession of misses on the downsidein both day-to-day projections and week-to-week estimates ofchanges at nonreporting banks. Misses are an ever-presentproblem, but they tended to cumulate in the downward directionunusually often in the past few reserve weeks. Part of this isexplicable, however, for in hindsight we can see that private-27- 10/22/63demands for bank credit and bank deposits were mounting morethan seasonally, and increasing bank reserve needs in theprocess.These recent developments have been generating someadjustments within the banking system. Bank loan demandfrom nonfinancial borrowers is proving considerably strongerthan seasonal, with business loans showing a brisker pacethan earlier this year. An important part of this loanstrength is centered outside the major cities. The dimensionsof the loan expansion do not approach those of a boom, but theyare large enough, given current reserve availability, to compelbanks to break the pattern of sizable net purchases ofsecurities that they had maintained so much further throughthis expansion period than in others. While still participatingin successive Treasury financings, banks have been net sellersof Governments in most intervening weeks. They have also cutback on purchases of municipals and agency issues, a fact thatprobably has a good deal to do with the recent poorer sales ofthe enlarged volume of new municipal issues. Meanwhile, bankloans to securities dealers and finance companies have droppedback, following the September tax date bulge.These actions have produced a net slowing of total bankearning asset expansion, and would ordinarily have beenaccompanied by a slackened rate of private deposit growth.Such tendency has been offset, however, by a more thancorresponding drop in U. S. Government deposits at banks fromtheir unusually high summer levels. Bolstered by these netdeposit transfers from Government hands, the totals of privatedemand deposits, time deposits, and the combined reservesrequired to support such deposits have all been rising. Themoney supply has moved up to a level some 4 per cent above ayear ago. Even this advance, however, has not quite kept pacewith the growth in GNP or in the volume of transactions beingfunneled through the public's checking accounts. As aconsequence, money velocity has risen somewhat further,measured on either an income or transactions basis. Should thecurrent business pick-up lead the public to wish to continueadding to money balances at anything like the recent rate, thebanking system will be in for some further changes. This isbecause no further boost to private deposits appears likelyfrom Government deposit reductions; they are already down to alevel around which they are projected to oscillate for theremainder of the year. Thus, any continuation of recent moneydemand would need to be compensated for by slower time depositgrowth, or by more intensive bank reserve utilization (probably-28- 10/22/63including more discounting), or be tranquilized, as it were,by somewhat more attractive rates on near-moneys.Insofar as time deposits are concerned, banks are hardat work trying to maintain their levels of time certificatesof deposit in the face of the fall needs for corporate fundsand the increased yields of other money market investments.We hear of active solicitation efforts by some prime-namebanks that are serving to stretch the conventional 25 basispoint margin of CD rates over Treasury bill rates of comparablematurity.While the impact of such bank efforts has already beenfelt in some degree through most of the markets for short-terminstruments, the long-term markets may be less far along inthe process of responding to the apparent change of pace inbank takings of securities. This is particularly true of themunicipal market, which has been heavily dependent upon bankbuying over the past year and a half. The absence of anystrong market reaction to date may reflect hopes by marketparticipants that banks will reappear as substantial net buyersof intermediate and longer term securities. If those hopesprove unfounded, an appreciable market readjustment wouldundoubtedly result.The Government securities market now appears technicallyin a better position than the municipal market and lessdependent upon the banks. Nonetheless, the new issues suppliedby the recent advance refunding are still not fully digested.Furthermore, the Government market will have its hands relativelyfull over the next two to three weeks with new Treasury activity,as outlined by the Manager in his report. The one-year billissues are becoming semi-routine for the dealers to handle, asare bill strips to a lesser degree. Furthermore, the November 15refunding offering is not expected to involve any issuesufficiently long to disturb the tenor of the market. But thesum total of such activity argues for maintenance of an "evenkeel" policy over the next three weeks. A policy of no changewould also befit the state of the capital markets more generallyviewed. Three weeks from now, with the Treasury financingspresumably successfully completed, the Committee should finditself in a better position to evaluate the appropriate posturefor monetary policy to assume in dealing with the climacticseasonal pressures that will arise later in November and December.Mr. Furth presented the following statement with regard to theU. S. balance of payments:-29- 10/22/63The U. S. payments deficit in September was smallerthan forecast on the basis of the tentative weekly figures.The official figure of $170 million includes, as a financingitem, the issue of $50 million of so-called convertiblenonmarketable Treasury securities to foreign monetaryauthorities to replace similar so-called nonconvertible bondsof a shorter maturity. Since this exchange does not materiallyaffect the international liquidity position of the U. S., theBoard's staff prefers to consider the transaction neutral fromthe point of view of the U. S. payments balance; accordingly,the deficit would be only $120 million.Thanks to this unexpectedly good result, the deficit forthe thir quarter as a whole is also likely to be smaller thanforecast. Based on the calculation preferred by the Board'sstaff, the estimated deficit is at a seasonally adjusted annualrate of less than $2-1/4 billion--and this estimate assumesthat the final September figure will be about $25 millionhigher than the figure mentioned in the beginning. Accordingto the calculation favored by the Commerce Department, theannual rate would be only $1-1/4 billion; and according tothe most favorable calculation sometimes used by the TreasuryDepartment, it would be as low as 1/2 of 1 billion dollars.The table distributed to the Committee shows the derivationof these various figures from their common source. (Note: Acopy of this table has been placed in the files of the Committee.)The improvement of the payments balance since the firsthalf of the year apparently reflected sharp reduction in the netoutflow of capital. Foreign security issues have abruptlydeclined while bank term loans, which would be exempt from theproposed interest equalization tax, may have begun to riseagain. This development suggests that part of the improvementhas been due to the initial shock effect of the tax proposal,and that capital outflows may increase again once the marketbecomes cognizant of the loopholes left by the proposed bill.It remains to be seen whether moral suasion or other methodscan help to close at least the loophole of bank loan exemptions.Tentative figures for the first half of October suggestthat the deficit may again be on the rise. But the weeklyfigures are so erratic that data for one or two weeks are notindicative.Developments abroad are, on the whole, encouraging. Europeseems to continue its upswing. There is some question whetherContinental Europe as a whole is reducing or increasing itstrade surplus: in the first half, Continental European imports-30- 10/22/63rose faster than exports but over the summer months importsremained stable while exports, especially from Germany,started again to expand.Rumors of revaluation of the Netherlands guilder andof devaluation of the Italian lira appear to have producedlarge inter-European transfers of funds. But the dollar hasbeen affected by these movements as the vehicle currency ofmost exchange transactions: when there are heavy shifts,say, of Italian lire into Swiss francs, the dollar should,in theory, become stronger against the lira and weaker againstthe franc, so that the combined impact would be neutral. Butif, as has actually happened, the Italian authorities intervenein the market to prevent the lira from weakening, the dollardoes not strengthen in Milan but it weakens in Zurich--withunfavorable psychological repercussions. This is one of theinevitable consequences of the international eminence of thedollar.Beyond their immediate market effect, however, the recentvicissitudes of European currencies suggest that the paymentssurplus of some European countries may be more vulnerable thanmany observers realize. The Italian payments balance, forinstance, has changed from a surplus of $500 million in 1962to a deficit in 1963, which may turn out quite as large; interms of the U. S. economy, this would mean a shift in thepayments balance by $10 billion. In the Netherlands, the wagecontrols, which many of our European friends had stronglyrecommended as a model for a U. S. income policy, have apparentlybroken down. In France, wage and price freezes are used tocombat inflation, despite the long history of failures of suchmeasures. All these developments seem to indicate that thecomparative export advantage of some European countries has anuncertain basis.If I may be permitted to indulge in some highly tentativeforecasting of the U. S. payments position, I should guess thatany renewed outflow of long-term capital may well be offset, orperhaps more than offset, by improvement in the trade balance.This assumes that the sale of U. S. wheat to the Soviets is notpermitted to founder on excessive U. S. freight rates; that asizable part of the export proceeds is received in cash; andthat the Canadian wheat sale to the Soviets will in turn leadto an increase in Canadian imports from the U. S. Thus, therelatively favorable third-quarter results may well be equalledor perhaps surpassed in the period immediately ahead.But the third-quarter payments deficit still remains toolarge, and the United States still has the greater part of the-31- way to go until the $3-1/2 billion rate prevailing in thepast few years is replaced by reasonable equilibrium.Chairman Martin then called for the go-around of comments andviews on economic conditions and monetary policy, beginning with Mr.Hayes, who presented the following statement:The domestic business outlook continues generallyfavorable. A note of caution is perhaps warranted by thefailure of industrial production in September to show anyappreciable pick-up after the August dip, and by an unexplaineddrop in retail sales in September. On the other hand, whenretail sales for August and September are viewed together,they are much more satisfactory. New model auto sales appearto be going well, consumer buying plans are better than ayear ago, and rising plant and equipment spending bybusiness is in prospect. Optimism is widespread, and hasbeen reinforced in recent days by the rise of stock prices torecord levels. Passage of the tax bill around the turn ofthe year could provide a strong additional stimulant.While the wholesale price index has been quite steady,there have been a considerable number of significant individualprice increases recently. Future developments in this areawill certainly bear watching.September witnessed a sharp gain in bank credit. It isparticularly interesting to note that in the first nine monthsof 1963 most measures of bank credit, bank deposits and bankreserves showed growth rates roughly equal to or a littlegreater than those in the first nine months of 1962, despitethe several modifications of monetary policy in the directionof less ease in the past year and a half. For example, requiredreserves rose this year at an annual rate of 3.4 per cent ascompared with 2.6 per cent a year earlier, total bank creditat 7.4 per cent as against 7.9 per cent and money supply plustime depcsits at 7.1 per cent as against 6.1 per cent. Whileit is true that the level of short-term interest rates roseconsiderably, the question may legitimately be raised whetherthe degree of over-all liquidity and credit availability hasnot remained somewhat higher than the Committee has intendedit to be. Even from a domestic point of view, the result mayhave been a somewhat excessive growth of credit in some areas--and the readiness of banks to lend abroad has continued unabated.10/22/63-32- 10/22/63The latest balance of payments developments have beenencouraging for the first time in many months. On thebasis of preliminary September figures--which may, of course,turn out to be misleading--there was a very sharp improvementin the third quarter over the second quarter. The de factofreeze on foreign bond issues and the beneficial influence ofmonetary policy moves on short-term capital flows wereprobably important contributing factors. Trade prospectshave been helped importantly by the Russian grain shortage.However, it is certainly too early to say whether a trueturning point in our balance of payments position has beenreached. In particular we must watch for signs that thefreeze on new issues may be causing an unusual bulge in termloans by American banks to foreigners and for signs thatnervousness as to possible future controls may be inducingAmerican firms and individuals to place or leave funds abroad.There has been an increasing tendency toward more restrictivecredit policies in Europe to counter inflationary threats inseveral important countries. We cannot overlook the possibilitythat monetary policy may have to be called upon again in thiscountry to contribute to further progress toward balance ofpayments equilibrium.For the time being, the Treasury's active financingprogram suggests the desirability of cur refraining from anysignificant policy change. And in any case there is somethingto be said for a wait-and-see attitude for a few weeks,,whilewe try to appraise more accurately both balance of paymentsand domestic business prospects for the fourth quarter.Fortunately, the prospective offering of $2 billion of Treasurybills before the month-end, in addition to the regular weeklyissues, is likely to bring a continuation of the upward pres-sure on bill rates that has been visible in recent weeks. Itseems to me that we should seek to preserve about the kind ofgeneral money market atmosphere that has prevailed in the lastthree wee.s. If Treasury activities should tend to putadditional pressure on bill rates we should not try very hardto offset it.The directive can probably be left as it is, except forthe inclusion of some reference to the imminent Treasuryfinancing.There is one area where I believe a policy move could bevery useful in the near future. I am thinking of the possibilityof further liberalization of the ceiling on time deposit interestrates under Regulation Q. In line with the generally firmertendency of short-term market interest rates in recent weeks,the rates on time certificates of deposit have risen to levels-33- 10/22/63 -34-where the 4 per cent ceiling is having some restrictiveeffects. It means that some of the moderate-sized banksoutside of the money centers are no longer able to competefor 3-month, 6-month and one-year money. This would notseem to be a healthy situation, either from a domesticpoint of view or from the standpoint of the balance ofpayments. In my judgment it would be well to lift theceiling substantially in order to permit normal competitivefactors free play in determining the size and geographicaldistribution of this important segment of the money market.Looking a little further ahead, it occurs to me thatthe Board might wish to consider injecting a few hundredmillion dollars of needed seasonal reserves by makinganother reduction in reserve requirements, preferably thoseapplicable to reserve city banks. If last year's experienceis any criterion, the danger that this might be interpretedas a move toward greater ease is not very great, and itshould have beneficial results in the short-term rate area.It also seems logical to use this instrument to provide atleast part of the country's long-term needs for additionalbank reserves.Mr. Ellis said that it was difficult to interpret the variousconflicting economic indicators for New England. Nonfarm employmentwas virtually unchanged from a year ago, and employment and manhoursworked in manufacturing were down. However, there had been a slightpickup in weekly earnings, and personal incomes were about 3 per centhigher. Department store sales were running about 9 per cent aboveyear-ago levels. Automobile sales were strengthening, and there wasa more widespread use of consumer credit. By the end of August, totalnew credit extensions were sufficient to bring the 12 months gain to6.7 per cent. Automobile credit extensions also picked up in Septemberafter a pause in August. In September, 78 per cent of Districtinstalment loans on new automobiles had maturities in excess of 30 10/22/63 -35-months, as compared with 75-1/2 per cent last year.Turning to the national economy, M,:. Ellis observed that therecent new highs in stock market price indexes had been achieved ata time when margin requirements were 50 per cent. Customer credithad risen about 18 per cent above its high before the May 1962 declinein stock prices. He also noted that banks had been stepping up loansto brokers, with a rise of about 50 per cent in the 12 months endir.gin September. Another category showing a large gain was foreign loans,up about 25 per cent, and it was natural to anticipate that bankswould be under more pressure to grant foreign loans, in view of thedecline in foreign long-term capital issues in this country. Hesensed that the pressure to make foreign loans was extending beyondthe New York banks; Boston banks showed sharp increases.These observations were offered, Mr. Ellis said, to highlightthe degree of credit availability that had been provided in recentweeks. He felt the domestic economy did not need the liquidity, andbanks did not need the degree of credit availability, that the Committeehad been providing. He was pleased by the recent firming in the moneymarket. The initiative lay with the market. If and when credit demandsstrengthened this fall, he would expect required reserves to exceedthe staff's guidelines even with no net change in free reserves.As to policy, Mr. Ellis thought it would be appropriate toconfirm the recent firmness in the money market, and probable further 10/22/63 -36-firmness that might develop. As targets cf monetary policy actionshe would suggest a short-term bill rate fluctuating around thediscount rate, but not falling below 3.4 per cent. Net free reservesmight best be in the lower part of the range from zero to $100 million.He would not favor any immediate action on discount rates. While hebelieved this policy was consistent with the present directive and hewould not urge a change in the directive, he thought it would bedesirable to update the wording of the directive soon.Mr. Coldwell reported that the Eleventh District economy sloweda little in August and September, with industrial production downslightly. On the other hand, construction contract awards in Augustwere at their highest levels since May, with residential, public works,and utilities construction leading the way. Cumulatively for the yearto date, construction activity was 10 per cent above a year ago.Employment conditions in the Eleventh District were fairlystable, Mr. Coldwell said. Retail sales were down a little in somesectors and up in others. Except for a good cotton crop, the agricul-tural situation in the District had been affected adversely by thelack of rain in some areas. The drought in the area east of SanAntonio was creating forced cattle sales, with resulting downwardpressures on cattle prices.In the banking and financial area, data for weekly reportingbanks indicated strong loan demand, particularly in real estate, 10/22/63 -37-consumer and security categories, and a slight rise in bank investments.Total bank credit, therefore, was expanding rather sharply in the District,and there was some pressure on reserve positions. Federal funds purchasesby District banks had risen markedly, and borrowings from the FederalReserve Bank had increased considerably in the past few weeks.Mr. Swan reported that business activity in the Twelfth Districthad continued to advance in September, although somewhat unevenly.Employment was up slightly more than seasonally but the unemploymentrate remained unchanged at a level above that for the nation as a whole,as the labor force continued to expand. It was encouraging that employ-ment had increased despite nine successive months of declines in defense-related employment, which currently was 4 per cent below the peak reachedin December 1962. The larger banks in the District, as a group, hadswung back to being net sellers of Federal funds, but the pattern wasuneven as some banks were borrowing in corsiderable amounts in the Federalfunds market and from the Reserve Bank.Mr. Swan noted that some savings and loan associations in theDistrict had announced increases in rates paid to shareholders effectiveOctober 1. These seemed to fall in two groups: some that had reducedrates in the middle of the year and were now returning them to earlierlevels; and a second group, consisting mainly of smaller institutions,that had not made earlier reductions. He thought the typical prevailingrate continued at 4.8 or 4.85 per cent. Some of the associations were 10/22/63 -38-increasing the frequency with which they compounded interest, andwere emphasizing this fact in their advertising. This was one of thefactors that had led some of the smaller institutions to offer higherrates on a quarterly compounding basis. The effect of the Septemberannouncement of higher rates was not yet known. District savings andloan associations did not do too well in attracting funds in July,but in August the inflow of funds was twice that of July.With respect to policy, Mr. Swan believed that both the Treasuryfinancing program and the economic situation in general suggested aposition for the next three weeks of even keel, or no change. He wasa little concerned, however, about exactly what "no change" meant rowthat the bill rate was about equal to, rather than slightly below, thediscount rate. It seemed to him that the situation that had developedduring the last three weeks was a little different from the oneanticipated at the last meeting. He agreed that in the past the Committeemay have over-emphasized the significance of small changes in billrates, but he thought such changes took on increasing importance asthe bill rate approached the discount rate. He shared the opinion Mr.Mitchell had expressed at the last meeting that when the bill raterises to a point where it is fluctuating around the discount rate itbecomes increasingly difficult to avoid action on the discount rate.He thought this might not be a real problem for the next three weeks,but it was something that soon was going to confront the Committeemore strongly than it had in the past. 10/22/63Mr. Deming reported that the agricultural situation in theNinth District was good this year. The direct effect the Russianwheat deal would have on the economy of the District was not entirelyclear, but it was evident that it would at least have pronouncedindirect effects, by making wheat prices firmer. Sentiment in thewheat country was overwhelmingly in favor of the deal. Nonagriculturalactivity seemed to be moving just about the same way in the Districtas in the nation, and confidence with respect to the immediate futureof the economy seemed quite high in the District.Banking conditions in the District were somewhat mixed, Mr.Deming said. At country banks, which apparently were under no liquiditypressure, loans were expanding, whereas loans at city banks continuedto seesaw from week to week. City banks were on the buying side ofthe Federal funds market fairly consistently. Occasionally therewould be a scramble for Federal funds, and occasionally a city memberbank would borrow from the Reserve Bank.Mr. Deming said he would subscribe to an even keel policy, inview of the imminent Treasury refunding, and a change in the directiveto refer to the Treasury financing seemed all that was needed. He sawno reason to change the discount rate at this time. In a concludingobservation, Mr. Deming said that he thought the Desk had done wellduring the past three weeks. As to the reserve projections, he supposedthey presented a problem that could not be licked completely.-39- 10/22/63 -40-Mr. Scanlon reported that economic activity in the SeventhDistrict apparently had moved to new high Levels in October as steeloutput continued to rise from the August low, production of 1964 autosincreased sharply, and output of machinery and equipment rose further.Business optimism in the District had strengthened further and therewas widespread confidence that economic activity would continue to risewell into next year. Sentiment had not been dampened by declines inthe national data on industrial production in August and retail salesin September. However, many individuals predicated their optimism ona tax cut to take place early next year.Some business firms had been encouraged by an improvement intheir profit margins, Mr. Scanlon said, particularly when allowancewas made for higher depreciation taken under the new guidelines. Whilesome price markups had not held, others had, in such varied lines assteel and steel products, chemicals, and hot water heaters, and wereexpected to have a favorable impact on profits of the firms involved.Labor market conditions appeared to have improved further inmost District centers when allowance was made for recent fluctuationsin steel and autos. Preliminary October figures suggested that retailsales had increased from the somewhat depressed September level.Cash receipts from farm marketings in the District in thefirst seven months of this year equaled receipts in the comparableyear-ago period, Mr. Scanlon said. Larger sales of corn and soybeans 10/22/63 -41-at higher prices had offset smaller receipts from livestock sales.As of October 1, farm land values in the District were estimated bycountry bankers to average 3 per cent above last year. The futuretrend of land values was expected to be stable or to continue upward.Mr. Scanlon said that the most: significant banking developmentin the District in recent weeks had been the strength in business loans.The recent surge of loan demand seemed to be concentrated at the largebanks, however. Virtually all of the rise at weekly reporting banks inthe third quarter was in the Chicago money market banks. For the thirdquarter as a whole, reporting banks in the District showed an increaseof almost 4 per cent in commercial and indurtrial loans, a rise nearlytwice as large as for the country as a whole. The basic deficit posi-tion of the Chicago banks remained somewhat in excess of $200 million,but they had been able to cover most of this with Federal funds.As to policy, Mr. Scanlon said he would favor maintaining theprevailing degree of firmness in the money market, and noted that hewas referring to the rates that had prevailed during the precedingfew days. He did not favor a change in the discount rate and wouldchange the directive only insofar as necessary to reflect the Treasuryfinancing.Mr. Clay said that economic developments in the Tenth Districtcontinued to differ from those in the country as a whole. District 10/22/63 -42-nonfarm employment, seasonally adjusted, had dipped slightly fromthe advanced level reached early this year. This followed a periodof rising employment during the last half of 1962 and of stabilityin early 1963. Nationally, scarcely any uptrend was evident inemployment during the last half of 1962, but marked improvement haddeveloped this year. Tenth District manufacturing employment hadshown little change during 1963 and was about 1-1/2 per cent less thanyear-earlier levels, while nationally, manufacturing employment wasnearly 1 per cent higher than in comparable months of 1962.Mr. Clay reported that farm income prospects in the TenthDistrict relative to last year were slightly less favorable than inthe nation. He attributed this in part to smaller crop productionthis year in contrast with record production nationally, and in partto substantially lower prices on meat animals, which are relativelymore important in Tenth District agriculture than in the nation.Higher costs of production were expected to bring a decline in netfarm income nationally as well as in the Tenth District, but the declinewould be more marked in the District for the reasons he had mentioned.Mr. Clay noted that interest rates had moved to higher levelsthan the Committee had set as its goal three weeks ago, with the 90-dayTreasury bill rate even reaching 3-1/2 per cent at one time. In hisopinion various factors, including Treasury financing activities,public statements, and misses in financial data projections, had worked 10/22/63 -43-to that end. It was important, Mr. Clay said, that this recentdevelopment should not be viewed as a monetary posture that theCommittee would become committed to maintain. This was particularlyimportant inasmuch as it had been suggested in previous meetings thatmarket developments leading to a Treasury bill rate in line with theFederal Reserve discount rate might be used as the base for anotherupward movement in the discount rate.Monetary policy had moved to a point, Mr. Clay said, wherefurther actions in this same direction must be evaluated criticallyin terms of the effectiveness of policy in sustaining economic expansion.While the over-all output performance of te economy in the third quarterwas encouraging, questions remained as to the sustaining character ofthe composition of demand growth achieved in this upswing. Moreover,the relationship of monetary policy to the lagging elements in theexpansion became of crucial importance at this stage of the cycle.Such an analysis did not lead easily, in his opinion, to acceptance ofthe present market position as the base for a change in monetary policyresulting in another roun of interest rate increases and lessenedcredit availability.At the present time, Mr. Clay said, the Committee should continueto provide additional reserves to the banking system for credit expansionand should not feel constrained to prevent the 90-day bill rate fromfalling somewhat below its recent level. Treasury financing presumably 10/22/63 -44-would be a factor in the conduct of open market operations in theperiod immediately ahead.Mr. Wayne said that signs of further improvement continuedto mark most sectors of Fifth District business. Factors indicatingcurrent strength included a sharp rise in building permits to a newhigh in September, sustained high-level demand for bituminous coal.,and strong and apparently improving markets for textiles and furniture.These trends were supported by the latest Reserve Bank survey, whichindicated a continuation of general optimism, strength in construction,and further rises in manufacturing new orders, shipments, employment,and hou-s.With respect to national conditions, Mr. Wayne said thebehavior of the economy in September and thus far in October suggestedthat earlier signs of hesitation were temporary and probably the resultof special factors. It seemed reasonably clear that the current strengthwas greater than seasonal. In the international area, there had beensubstantial improvements in nearly all segments of the balance of pay-ments, at least for the time being. The problem was by no means solved,but was a little less urgent than three months ago.Mr. Wayne said that he found himself in almost complete agreementwith Messrs. Ellis and Scanlon on policy. He favored maintaining an"even keel" for the next three weeks, interpreting this to mean a billrate pressing rather firmly against the discount rate and free reserves 10/22/63between zero and $100 million. He shared Mr. Ellis' concern regardingthe degree of liquidity the Committee had maintained in the economy.He thought developments in the near future might suggest it was morethan needed.Mr. Mills said that, in his view, the Committee was tied toa continuing commitment to follow a monetary and credit policy mear.tto combat the balance of payments problem. If such was the case, thepolicy followed since the last meeting of the Committee appeared tohim appropriate. This policy was exemplified in the technical resultsrevealed in the supply of reserves available to the banking system andin the movements of interest rates.Mr. Robertson presented the following statement:I t.ke it that the cluttered Treasury financing calendarover the next three weeks effectively precludes our makingany change in monetary policy. Even keel considerations inthis respect are reinforced by the sensitive state of thecapital markets in general. I would want us to do nothingthat would send a serious ripple of tightening through thefinancial markets at this stage, and this implies that weshould be trying to achieve a little more comfortable levelof free reserves during the coming weeks of peak seasonalpressure than the low figures down to which we slid unin-tentionally over the past month. Certainly the improvementappearing in our balance of payments statistics would seemto preclude any contention that there exists a need forfurther tightening on that ground alone.On the other hand, I would not want to advocate anyovert easing of policy, at least until it is clear thatthe developments now taking place in the price area haveno cumulative inflationary potential. It cost us a greatdeal of effort and anguish to break the wage-price spiralin this country five years ago, and that is a victory Iwould dislike to see reversed. Consequently, my prescription-45- 10/22/63 -46-would be for no change in either the consensus or thedirective today, apart from a recognition of the Treasuryfinancing.Mr. Shepardson said that he thought the general outlook wason the favorable side. He was concerned, however, about what seemedto him to be a continuing excessive buildup of credit and money thatcould lead to increases in the price level, a development he was surethe Committee did not favor. As to policy, he thought that Treasuryfinancing activities precluded any change during the coming three weeksHe was concerned about the future but did not advocate any change inpolicy at the present time.Mr. Mitchell said that it seemed to him there had been adramatic improvement in the balance of payments situation. The deficithad declined from an annual rate of over $4 billion in the first halfof the year to $2-1/4 billion in the third quarter, despite asubstantial increase in foreign lending by U. S. banks. He thoughtfurther imprcvement was in prospect, because of the impact of grainsales t, Russia and other Eastern European countries. He did not believethat the recent discount rate increase had very much to do with theimprovement, although it might have had some effect.In Mr. Mitchell's opinion, the domestic economy was performingwell, and certainly better than he had expected earlier in the year.Still, he thought the Committee was not making a dent in the long-runproblem, and until it did so he did not believe the Committee should 10/22/63 -47-abandon efforts to use monetary policy to achieve greater resourceutilization. He thought the Committee was now coming into a fairlysignificant period, since it had generated expectations in the capitalmarket of an increase in long-term interest rates. Also, the expectedlarge increase in municipal offerings would come into the capitalmarket at a time when commercial banks had become less interested insuch securities. This could mean only one thing--a rise in rates ontax-exempt securities. This struck him as unfortunate, since theeconomy needed every source of strength that could be mustered.Mr. Mitchell felt that the Desk had not done quite what theCommittee had wanted in the period since the last meeting. Heappreciated that present money market circumstances had come aboutpartly as a result of erroneous estimates of factors affecting reserves.He urged, however, that technical work be undertaken to improve thequality of the estimates on which the Desk relied. He agreed with Mr.Clay on policy for the next three weeks.Mr. Hickman noted that the major series showed gains from thesecond to the third quarters, even though the third quarter ended on asomewhat subdued note. Thus, the index of industrial production onaverage was up 1.3 per cent from the second quarter, retail sales wereup 1.1 per cent despite a weak September showing, and gross nationalproduct showed an unexpectedly large gain of 1-1/2 per cent.What was now known about October's performance, Mr. Hickman 10/22/63 -48-said, indicated clear-cut forward movement. He found reports of autosales particularly noteworthy, with the first 10 days of the monthestablishing a new record for the period. Largely as a result, totalretail sales, seasonally adjusted, thus far in October had been runningat a rate comparable to the record of last August. Auto productionwas expected to reach 800,000 units in October, for a considerablylarger than seasonal gain. Steel output in the nation had risenmoderately for eight of the past nine weeks, but little change wasexpected for the remainder of the year. In the steel-consuming industries,information from Fourth District machinery producers indicated a strongorder backlog, supplementing the most recent national report indicatinga rise in new orders received by durable goods manufacturers. Thus,there were grounds for expecting that October would see a further risein the production index, following a temporary standstill in September.Mr. Hickman said that develcpments in the Fourth Districtin some respects had not been quite sc favorable as in the nation as awhole. Steel output in the Cleveland-Lorain area, after having comparedfavorably with U. S. rates for a considerable period, had recentlyshown some tendency to lag. The unemployment claims figures, which hadbeen improving markedly, had undergone a slight setback in most of theDistrict's labor market areas. Auto sales in the Fourth District,however, were sharing fully in the national upsweep, with Pittsburghfigures especially strong. Construction activity also appeared to be 10/22/63 -49-relatively strong in the District; in Cleveland, the year-to-datevolume of pernits by mid-September had topped the 12-month totals forall previous years of record, due in part to urban renewal.Mr. Hickman observed that changes in assets and liabilitiesof all reporting banks in recent weeks had been dominated by Treasuryfinancing operations and by related changes in securities loans and inthe Treasury cash balance. Looking behind the figures, however, thereappeared to have been more than seasonal expansion in business loandemand, a trend that was particularly observable in the Fourth District.Required reserves held against private deposits were againrunning disconcertingly ahead of the staff's guideline projection,which was adjusted in late September in such a way as to lock in theeffects of the 4.3 per cent annual rate of expansion that had occurredbetween May and July. Successive projections at a 3 per cent rate hadbeen made with four different base periods beginning June 13, 1962,despite several policy decisions by the Committee towards lesser ease.At the time of each revision in the base, actual annual rates ofmonetary expansion had been running in excess of projected rates.Under the circumstances, Mr. Hickman felt that there was a real questionas to whether the staff guidelines were consistent with the intent ofthe Committee.Mr. Hickman indicated that he thought monetary policy inrecent weeks had, on the whole, worked out fairly well, with free 10/22/63 -50-reserves ranging well below $100 million. With recent help from theTreasury's strip of bills, the 91-day bill rate had moved close tothe discount rate, and international interest rate differentials hadmoved favorably to the U. S. He recommended encouragement of furthermovement in these same directions; free reserves should be allowed tofluctuate around the zero level as soon as Treasury financing permitted.Mr. Hickman concluded by saying the Desk wes to be commended for itsskill in a difficult period and particularly for conducting open marketoperations in the short-term area.Mr. Bopp said that weekly indicators, plus incomplete Septemberdata, showed the Third District in a state of economic backing andfilling The year-end seasonal upswing in unemployment claims was justbeginning; output was not strong in total, despite strength in steelproduction; and sales in department stores remained rather slow,although they had exhibited strength enough to pull even with 1962.The tightness evident at the last meeting of the Committeeincreased at Third District commercial banks during the last threeweeks,Mr. Bopp said. The basic reserve deficit of reserve city bankswas a little over $50 million on a weekly average basis. This figurehad been exceeded on only six other occasions this year and only abouteight times in 1962. Country bank borrowing at the discount windowalso rose. Business loans at weekly reporting member banks of theThird District continued to display weakness, declining $5 million 10/22/63 -51-during the two weeks ending October 16. Net loans adjusted fell by$39 million and investments by $8 million.Mr. Bopp said he would agree with Messrs. Swan and Clay as tooperations for the next three weeks. He expressed concern that theTreasury planned an announcement on the day following this meeting ofa financing operation that would not take place for three weeks. Hefelt that such a long lead time might, on occasion, unduly tie theCommittee's hands with respect to policy changes.Mr. Bryan said that what few new economic statistics wereavailable for the Sixth District were mainly in the financial area.Bank debits, deposits and currency, and the money supply were all upsharply. Loans and investments at member banks also were up, notablybusiness loans, and borrowings from the Federal Reserve Bank had risen.He did not know what to make of the sharp increase in business loansor the news ..f small bu. pervasive price increases. These might portenda general price inflation, or they might simply reflect an inventorybuildup Business sentiment seemed highly optimistic.Mr. Bryan felt that the Treasury financing precluded any changein policy at this meeting. He believed that the business situationwarranted careful watching, as indeed it always did. The money supplyseemed to be progressing satisfactorily. Liquid assets in the handsof the public were continuing their nearly vertical climb. Requiredreserves continued substantially above the staff's guidelines, even 10/22/63 -52-as amended. He saw no reason to change the discount rate at thistime nor to change the Committee's policy. If there was any policychange, however, he felt it should be in the direction of zero freereserves, with the thought in mind that even zero free reserves canfinance inflation.Mr. Bryan said that, if at all possible, the next move in thediscount rate should be premeditated and not determined by expectationalforces in the market. He shared Mr. Hickman's views about the staffreserve projections, but did not take the matter too seriously.Mr. Shuford said that since the first of the year economicactivity in the Eighth District had generally paralleled that of thecountry as a whole. During the first part of the year the Districthad had a marked expansion, and since mid-year business had expandedonly moderately. Employment in the District's major labor markets andthe volume of bank debits had both been unchanged since June, anddepartment store sales had drifted lower since May. On the other hand,industrial use of electric power, business loans at reporting banks,and bank deposits had all continued to expand. Member bank borrowingsfrom the Federal Reserve Bank had not been large this fall. Whilethere was a lack of moisture in the District this year, agriculturalproduction for the District as a whole probably would exceed that oflast year by a significant margin.As to policy, Mr. Shuford said that he would favor no change, 10/22/63 -53-particularly in view of the Treasury financing. He was not thinkingin terms of any particular level of free reserves; he thought reservesand other measures such as money supply were more meaningful. Short-term rates should fluctuate around 3.45 per cent. He thought the policythe Committee had been following was reasonably satisfactory under thecircumstances. Short-term rates had moved up to a 3.45 level and thengone higher but had dropped back down to 3.48. There had been sustain-able and reasonable growth in the economy. The Committee's interestin providing reserves had facilitated a desirable continuing monetaryexpansion. He was alert to the situation that seemed to be developingwith respect to prices. He did not feel that the growth in liquidityhad been excessive, but both of these areas deserved close watching.He would make no change in policy, and would not change the directiveexcept to recgnize the Treasury financing.Mr. Balderston said he was gratified by the elimination of thedifferential between U. S. bill rates and those of Canada and England.He noted, however, that rates on commercial paper in both countrieswere higher than in the U. S. He was encouraged by the balance ofpayments projections for the fourth quarter, but doubted that theimprovement in the balance of payments for the year as a whole wouldbe adequate to satisfy the nation's creditors. He shared with Mr.Robertson and Mr. Bryan their concern about recent price behavior,and was worried that the liquidity that had been made available was 10/22/63 -54-being misapplied in the stock market and elsewhere. Over the pastyear, he noted, available reserves had risen by over $800 millionand nonborrowed reserves by over $500 million. He felt the Committeemight have built up an inflationary potential that was greater thancurrent price movements had indicated. Mr. Balderston concluded bysaying that, in view of the Treasury financing, he favored no changein policy at this time.Chairman Martin said he had nothing to add to the observationsthat had already been made. He thought that it was easier to formulatethe consensus at this meeting than at any in a long time; the Committeeclearly favored no change in policy. He felt that the only problemconcerned the wording of the current policy directive. Mr. Young hadsome alternative variants for both paragraphs of the directive whichthe Committee might like to consider.In discussing the various alternatives proposed for the firstparagraph, Mr. Young said that the first involved no change, and thesecond a modest change affecting the first sentence. The proposed newfirst sentence put emphasis "on maintaining conditions in the moneymarket that would contribute to continued improvement in the capitalaccount of the U. S. balance of payments." Suggestions had also beenreceived for recasting the first paragraph as a whole to update thelanguage, and an attempt had been made to do so in the third alternative.With respect to the second paragraph, Mr. Young noted that the 10/22/63 -55-first alternative differed from the one issued at the previous meetingonly by the addition of a reference to the imminent Treasury financing,and continued to call for operations to be conducted with "a view tomaintaining the prevailing degree of firmness in the money market...."The second alternative also included the Treasury financing reference,but substituted the wording "the degree of firmness in the money marketthat has prevailed in recent weeks" for the earlier wording.In the course of the discussion, it became evident that theCommittee unanimously favored the third of the proposed alternativesfor the first paragraph. It was agreed that the change in language wasintended simply to reflect recent developments in the domestic economyand in the balance of payments and not to signify any change in policy.There were differences of views, however, as to which of thetwo proposed alternatives for the second paragraph better reflected theCommittee's consensus for no change in policy. Mr. Mitchell expresseda preference for the second alternative, on grounds of both substanceand degree of clarity. He felt that the word "prevailing" by itselfcould mean either prevailing in recent weeks or at the time of thismeeting, and since he believed the former was the Committee's intent,he considered it desirable to be explicit on the point. Messrs. Hayesand Shepardson spoke in favor of the first alternative. Mr. Hayes foundthe phrase "in recent weeks" ambiguous since the number of weeks wasnot .specified. If taken to mean the last three weeks, he thought the 10/22/63substance of the second alternative was the same as the first; butif taken to apply to a longer period, he felt it would imply thatthe Committee wanted to back off from the degree of firmness that hadbeen achieved, and he did not think this was the case. Mr. Shepardsonsaid the word "prevailing" was perfectly explicit to him; it meantprevailing at the time of the meeting.Chairman Martin observed that, while others might feeldifferently, to his mind there was no substantive difference betweenthe alternatives. The problem, as he saw it, was a semantic one ofa type the Committee had to struggle with continually. He suggestedthat the Committee members be polled on their preference, on theassumption that the two alternatives were substantially equivalent inmeaning. The results of the poll indicated that a majority preferredthe second alternative.Thereupon, upon motion duly made andseconded, the Federal Reserve Bank of NewYork was authorized and directed, untilotherwise directed by the Committee, toexecute transactions in the System Accountin accordance with the following currenteconomic policy directive:It is the Federal Open Market Committee's current policyto accommodate moderate growth in bank credit, while main-taining conditions in the money market that would contributeto continued improvement in the capital account of the U. S.balance of payments. This policy takes into considerationthe fact that domestic economic activity is expandingfurther, although with a margin of underutilized resources;and the fact that the balance of payments position is stilladverse despite a tendency to reduced deficits. It alsorecognizes the increases in bank credit, money supply, andthe reserve base of recent months.-56- 10/22/63 -57-To implement this policy, and taking into account theimminent Treasury refinancing, System open market operationsshall be conducted with a view to maintaining the degree offirmness in the money market that has prevailed in recentweeks, while accommodating moderate expansion in aggregatebank reserves.Votes for this action: Messrs. Martin,Hayes, Balderston, Bopp, Clay, Mills,Mitchell, Robertson, Scanlon, Shepardson,and Shuford. Votes against this action:None.Chairman Martin noted the Account Manager's earlier suggestionthat the continuing authority directive be left unchanged for anotherthree weeks with respect to the limitation of $1.5 billion for changesin the aggregate amount of U. S. Government securities held in theSystem Open Market Account during any period between meetings of theCommittee. No objection was made to leaving this directive unchanged.The Chairman suggested that in view of the lateness of thehour the Committee once again hold over until the next meeting itsdiscussion of the memorandum on the question of making availableminutes of the Federal Open Market Committee for some past periodfor use of scholars and others, and there was no objection.At this point there were distributed copies of a list ofpossible dates for meetings of the Committee through 1964 forconsideration by the members of the Committee.It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open MarketCommittee would be held on November 12, 1963. 10/22/63 -58-The meeting then adjourned.Secretary