 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held, inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Systemin Washington on Tuesday, August 20, 1963, at 9:30 a.m..PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Martin,. ChairmanBalderstonBoppClayIronsMillsMitchellRobertsonScanlonShepardsonTreiber,. Alternate to Mr. HayesMessrs. Hickman, Wayne, Shuford,.andAlternate Members of the FederalMarket CommitteeSwan,OpenMessrs. Bryan and Deming, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Atlanta andMinneapolis, respectivelyMr. Kenyon, Assistant SecretaryMr. Hackley, General CounselMr. Noyes, EconomistMessrs. Baughman, Brill, Garvy, and Tow,Associate EconomistsMr. Stone, Manager, System Open Market AccountMr. Malony, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Sammons, Adviser, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMr. Keir, Senior Economist, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Spencer,. General Assistant, Office of theSecretary, Board of GovernorsMessrs.. Latham, Hilkert, and Coldwell, FirstVice Presidents of the Federal ReserveBanks of Boston, Philadelphia, and Dallas,respectively 8/20/63 -2-Messrs. Sanford, Mann, Ratchford, Jones,Strothman, and Grove, Vice Presidents ofthe Federal Reserve Banks of New York,Cleveland, Richmond, St. Louis, Minneapolis,and San Francisco, respectivelyMr. Brandt, Assistant Vice President, Federal.Reserve Bank of AtlantaMr. Anderson, Financial Economist, FederalReserve Bank of BostonMr. Meek, Manager, Securities Department,Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkBefore this meeting there had been distributed to the Committeea report from the Special Manager of the System Open Market Account onforeign exchange market conditions and on Open Market Account andTreasury operations in foreign currencies for the period July 30 throughAugust 14, 1963, together with a supplementary report covering theperiod August 15 through 19, 1963. Copies of these reports have beenplaced in the files of the Committee.In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. Sanford notedthat the foreign exchange markets had been subject, since the previousmeeting of the Committee, to two principal influences: (a) the uncer--tainties arising from the proposed interest equalization tax whichaffected, in largest measure, the dollar/Swiss franc rate, and (b) thedullness which settles down in the foreign exchange markets in Augustwhen many Europeans take their vacations. TheLondon gold market wasalso influenced by the uncertainties concerning the position of thedollar, and at times the turnover was quite heavy. The gold price wasgenerally held between $35.09 and $35.10 or a bit more, but as demand 8/20/63 -3-exceeded the amount of newly produced gold entering the market, thecentral bank gold pool suffered a loss. Meanwhile, the U. S. goldstock was reduced $50 million in the week ended August 14, followingthree weeks in which no change occurred. The drop in the gold stockhad fortified holdings of the Stabilization Fund to a point at whichthe expected usual French taking of $34 million in August should notoccasion any further drop in the gold stock.The Swiss franc continued to be subject to considerable upwardpressure, as a result of continued tight money conditions in Zurich andthe demand for Swiss francs from abroad. Some of the pressure wasrelieved by U. S. Treasury spot sales here of $9.7 million equivalentand forward sales abroad of Swiss francs amounting to 33 million dollarsequivalent in the closing days of July and opening days of August, andthe System Account Management offered to reactivate swap drawings inorder to forestall a possible conversion of dollars into gold by theSwiss authorities. The Swiss National Bank, however, suggested thatit deal with the situation for the time being through two methods:(1) taking in surplus dollars in its own market and giving the New YorkReserve Bank orders to sell Swiss francs in the New York market afterthe close of the Zurich market, and (2) engaging in a swap transactionfor $10 million with its own market by which it bought $10 million fromthe Swiss banks on a spot basis, and simultaneously sold them forwardto the same banks. The Swiss cooperation seemed to have been of ad-vantage to the Federal Reserve, in that it stretched out the interval 8/20/63 -4--between the retirement of the previous use of the swap facility betweenthe System and the National Bank and the next possible use; and over andabove that the Swiss National Bank provided the Swiss francs with whichthe market could be kept orderly somewhat above, or at, the rate atwhich the central bank usually intervenes. On most days the New YorkReserve Bank had 10 million francs with which to operate in the New Yorkmarket, and on one occasion 20 million francs to use if the pressurereached such a level as to necessitate their use. In the period sinceJuly 18, the aggregate of Swiss franc sales in the New York market forthe Swiss National Bank had been the equivalent of $12.3 million; theSwiss National Bank itself had taken in $14 million; and it had swapped$10 million with its market. The aggregate of operations by the SwissNational Bank therefore had been $36 million, which with the $43.0million of Treasury spot and forward operations gave a total of $79 millionof dollar-supporting operations in Swiss francs since July 18. Aside fromone occasion when the dollar declined to 4.3150 Swiss francs to the dollar,the rate in general had been maintained around 4.3160; it was now at4.3155-58. To the amount of assistarce to the dollar extended in thecase of the Swiss franc, there should be added a net amount of $29 millionacquired by the Bundesbank (for one brief period the Bundesbank had tosell dollars to support the DM rate; the Federal Reserve participated tothe extent of $7-1/2 million and was able to reduce its swap drawings bythat amount), and the sale of $12.5 million of French francs by the System 8/20/63 -5-with the francs provided by the drawing on the swap arrangement. Theaggregate amount of assistance to the dollar since. July 18 had been atleast $121 million plus the $28 million absorbed by purchases of goldin the London market.Reverting to the strong demand for Swiss francs in recent weeks,Mr. Sanford said that some of the demand had been identified with move-ment of dollar funds by Latin Americans unwilling to divulge the trueownershp of securities to avoid the proposed interest equalization tax(and perhaps for reasons related to their own governments); some of thedemand had been associated with trust companies in the U.S. shiftingfunds to Switzerland to obtain increased flexibility, in view of theproposed tax. Over and above these indications of actual flows of funds,there had been reports by recently returned bankers and brokers, whoasserted that their commercial bank contacts on the Continent believedthat European holders of American securities would tend to liquidatesuch securities because they viewed the proposed interest equalizationtax as a first step in exchange controls on capital movements; suchcontacts believed that losses of funds for this reason might exceedamounts saved by the imposition of the tax.Among developments in Europe affecting the status of the dollar,it was worthy of note, Mr. Sanford said, that the French authorities hadtightened up materially their restrictions on borrowings abroad of Frenchcompanies. This should have a salutary effect. 8/20/63 -6-Turning to Canada, Mr. Sanford noted that the Bank of Canada,after suffering further exchange losses, had increased its discountrate from 3-1/2 to 4 per cent, effective August 12, and the exchangerate showed a moderate but short-lived rise. The rate was now about92.35, some 20 points above the low reached on July 19.The sterling market had been remarkably quiet during the pastmonth, and the rate had held at 2.80 or slightly better until yesterday,when it dipped below par. At that point the System Account purchased,at 2.7990, one million pounds of sterling which was being offered inthe market, in order to nip in the bud any incipient speculative move-ment, and the Bank of England cleaned up its market at the same ratebefore closing for the day and leaving a trading order with the FederalReserve that was not touched off. In addition, the Treasury offered topurchase sterling. The weakness in sterling was attributed to a con-siderable widening of the trade gap in July.The covered interest arbitrage between U. S. Treasury bills andU. K. and Canadian bills had recently been at or close to parity, withno real advantage in moving funds in either direction. Concerning theflow of fund through other money market instruments, i.e., U. K. publicauthorities paper and Canadian commercial and financial paper, therehad been a virtual balance of small outflows and reflows for the pastfour weeks, according to the fragmentary data collected at the ReserveBank's Exchange Trading Desk. This compared with an outflow of about 8/20/63 -7-$45 million in the previous four weeks. Naturally, the recent increasein the Canadian discount rate might change the picture again, as someof the Canadin market rates had beer marked up.In reply to a request for further comment with regard to recentdevelopments in respect to sterling, Mr. Sanford noted that the markethad reacted fairly quickly yesterday to the most recent British tradefigures. While it could be said that the figures for any one monthwere not particularly significant, there ias some feeling that a spec-ulative movement might build up. Therefore, in order to stop any suchmovement in its tracks, measures were taken to guard against it promptlyand adequately. So far as could be observed, the sterling pressure wasnot characterized by any unusual movement of funds, for example toSwitzerland. It appeared, in part, to have something to do with themanner in which banks in this country and abroad manage their foreignexchange positions.In reply to a question as to whether there had been any indicationof an inflow of short-term funds following the Federal Reserve discountrate increase, Mr. Sanford said the only definite evidence was that whichhe had cited in his previous comments. Movements of short-term fundsbetween this country and Canada and the United Kingdom, which are particu-larly susceptible to interest rate differentials, apparently were essentiallyin balance for the most recent four weeks whereas in the previous fourweeks there was a loss of $45 million. No data were yet available to 8/20/63 -8-indicate whether this situation had been altered by the increase in theCanadian discount rate. Neither was there any indication as yet of ashift by U. S. corporations or others out of the Euro-dollar market.However, the narrowing of the differential between Euro-dollar ratesand short-term rates in this country would seem to suggest that perhapssome tendency to shift out of the Euro-dollar market might develop.Thereupon, upon motion duly made andseconded, and by unanimous vote, the SystemOpen Market Account transcctions in foreigncurrencies during the period July 30 throughAugust 19, 1963, were approved, ratified,and confirmed.Mr. Sanford noted that the $50 million standby swap arrangementbetween the System and the Netherlands Bank would mature September 13,1963, and he recommended renewal of this arrangement for another threemonths.The proposed renewal of the swap arrange-ment, as recommended by Mr. Sanford, wasapproved unanimously.Mr. Sanford also noted that the Federal Reserve sterling/Swissfranc swap with the Bank for International Settlements would mature onSeptember 10, 1963. This swap was entered into originally on June 10,1963. In view of the tight situation in the Swiss franc market, herecommended renewal for another three months unless conditions hadchanged by early September.The proposed renewal, as recommendedby Mr. Sanford, was noted without objection. 8/20/63This concluded the discussion of System foreign currencyoperations and related matters.Before this meeting there had been distributed to the membersof the Committee a report covering open market operations in U. S.Government securities and bankers' arceptances for the period July 30through August 14, 1963, and a supplementary report covering the periodAugust 15 through 19, 1963. Copies. of these reports have been placedin the files of the Committee.In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Stone commented.as follows:Our principal concern during the past few weeks has beento achieve slightly firmer money market conditions in order tohelp bring about a level of short-tern interest rates more inconsonance with the discount rate increase adopted by the Systemlast month. In terms of Treasury bill rates, progress towardthis objective was disappointing in the first few days of therecent period. Shortly after the last meeting, we learned thatthe Treasury would not, after all, offer a strip of bills duringthe period, as both we and they had expected. Moreover, theredeveloped a particularly active nonbark demand for bills--especially from various State and local authority funds--whichabsorbed dealers' limited supplies and pulled rates lower.Indeed, the demand was such that dealers' trading positions inbills fell from about $680 million on Monday, July 29, to about$450 million on Friday, August 2--despite dealer awards of $640million in the July 29 auction. By August 2, the three-monthbill rate briefly touched a low point of 3.20 per cent bid. Ifnot for the market's belief that additional Treasury cashfinancing in the bill area was a likely possibility, rates mightwell have pulled even lower.The subsequent turn-around, which carried the three-monthrate up to about 3.36 per cent in yesterday's auction, hadseveral causes. Mainly, it was a product of the modest firmingof bank reserve positions which developed after the last meetingof the Committee. Given this moderate edge of firmness, com-mercial banks were induced to make sizable net sales of bills.-9- 8/20/63Moreover, in the course of achieving a firmer condition in themoney market, the System sold about $ 500 million of Treasurybills in three go-arounds of the market--on August 7, 13, and15--which not only absorbed reserves but also helped directlyto enlarge market supplies of bills. The ability of the SystemAccount to make this volume of bill sales in the market, and tosatisfy part of the foreign account demand for bills, withoutdepressing reserve Levels too sharply, was partly a reflectionof the Account's purchases of roughly $280 million of coupon-bearing securities in the market.At the same time that System and commercial bank sellingwas adding to supplies, nonbank demand was tending to lessensomewhat, and by Friday, August 16, the dealers' tradingposition in bills had risen to about $1.2 billion--which,however, was still a relatively low level by ordinary standards.In addition, market expectations of Treasury financing in thebill area were also a factor tending to produce cautiousattitudes and higher rates in the bill market--although it isquestionable how long these expectations would remain a factorif the Treasury does not follow through with some offeringsfairly soon. As I shall outline in a moment, the market maynot have too long to wait before seeing these expectationsfulfilled.In comparison with bills, the market in Treasury notes andbonds was relatively dull during the recent period, with smallnet chanes in price and quiet trading, activity. Here too,expectations of Treasury financing overhung the market--in thiscase involving anticipations of a pre-refunding or advancerefunding in which, as in other recent operations of this kind,attractive investment opportunities wculd open up in every majorsector of the maturity scale.There also was little change in prices of corporate andmunicipal securities. New issue reaching the market encounteredfairly aggressive bidding by underwriters, but in most casesonly lukewarm interest from investors. In the corporate area,where supplies have been light and are expected to remain lightin the immediate future, the slow sales of recent issues have notbeen a problem, but in the tax-exempt area some signs of con-gestion have again begun to emerge.The Treasury faces a busy financing schedule for the nextseveral weeks. We expect that the first in a series of monthlyofferings of one-year Treasury bills may be announced tomorrowfor auction next Tuesday and payment on September 3. The amountwould be $1 billion. Then, probably on September 4, the Treasury-10- 8/20/63would announce an advance refunding operation for whichsubscription books would be open from September 9 through13. Details of the refunding are not yet decided, but itmay include a pre-refunding of May 1964 issues as well asan advance refunding of some 1966 and 1967 maturities. Atthe same time that it announces the advance refunding, theTreasury would announce a $1 billion strip of Treasurybills to be auctioned about September 11 and paid for aweek later. We understand that the cash borrowings throughthe one-year bills and the bill strip would relieve theTreasury of any need to borrow additional cash until earlyOctober.As a matter of information for the Committee, I shouldlike to turn for a moment or two to the question of theprocedures for allocating the System Account. We noted, atthe time the present procedures were adopted last March,that the useful life of these procedures would be limitedand that we would continue in our efforts to devise a setof rules that would be adequate to circumstances in whichreserve ratios push closer toward 25 oer cent. The existingprocedures have worked very satisfactorily. But the fallexpansion of note and deposit liabilities will soon be gettingunder way, and our gold stock will very likely show furtherdeclines. Thus we may, sometime this fall, begin to experiencedifficulty with the procedures now in effect.We have therefore developed, in a tentative way, a re-vised set of procedures which we hope to have in shape forthe Committee's consideration in the near future.In further comments, made in response to questions, Mr. Stonestated that recent dealer short positions in coupon issues reflectedprimarily a commitment on the part of certain dealers to deliver $197million of 4 per cent Treasury bonds of 1970 to Grant County, Washington,by the end of this year. This commitment was filed about the end of July,at which time dealer positions in 5 to 10-year bonds automatically movedfrom a long to a short position. Actually, there were modest longpositions in the hands of some of the dealers.-11- 8/20/63 -12-With regard to Open Market Account transactions in coupon issuessince the previous Committee meeting, Mr. Stone said the securitiespurchased for the Account had been coming in part from the long positionsof those dealers who had such securities and in part from investors whowere selling bonds in the market for one reason or another. In everycase the Account operations in coupon issues had been addressed to theproblem of exerting some upward pressure on bill rates without anysharp or major decline in reserve availability. In order to achievethese objectives in a situation where the Treasury did not add to thesupply of bills and nonbank demand for bills was vigorous, the Desk wasforced to resort to the device of purchasing coupon issues. On August1 and 2, when the first purchases were made, Treasury bill rates weredeclining--reaching 3.20 per cent on the latter day--and at the same timea position of net borrowed reserves was being faced. The Desk did notregard it as compatible with the Committee's instructions to supplyreserves through the bill market under those circumstances. Bonds wereavailable, however, and the Desk therefore bought bonds. Some bondswere also purchased on August 8 after bill rates had turned around andhad reached the level that prevailed at the beginning of operations underthe directive issued by the Committee at the July 30 meeting. On August 8,foreign account purchase orders for bills amounted to $41 million. TheAccount Management felt that if those bills were acquired in the market,that might reverse some of the progress that had been made; therefore,bills were sold out of System Account. However, this again gave rise 8/20/63 -13-to a net borrowed reserve position, and the Desk bought bonds offeredby dealers at their initiative. Other coupon issues were purchasedlast Thursday and Friday, the Desk having sold $400 million of billsin the market on Tuesday and Thursday to exert upward pressure on thebill rate. That rate had moved up to the neighborhood of 3.30, and itseemed to the Account Management that circumstances pointed to thislevel as a plateau. It appeared that if some additional bills were madeavailable to the market, the rate could be gotten up from the plateauto the 3-3/8 per cent level mentioned at the July 30 Committee meeting.The Desk was aware that it would be necessary to re-supply some reservesabsorbed through the sale of bills, and bonds again were available inmoderate amount. The bill rate in yesterday's auction was 3.36.However, net borrowed reserves again came into the picture to a slightdegree, and the Desk again supplied reserves by acquiring bonds. In allinstances, the operations were directed toward the effect on the shortrate, not the long rate.In reply to an inquiry concerning market reaction to these opera-tions, Mr. Stone suggested that it was necessary to go back to the 1961experience in discussing this point. The market had placed upon the1961 experience the same interpretation as on the current operations.It had become clear to the market rather quickly that operations inlong-term issues were addressed to the short-term rate, and that theoperations were being conducted in such a way as to insure the System's 8/20/63 -14-remaining a marginal participant in whatever sector of the market itconducted operations. The article in the Federal Reserve Bulletin ofApril 1963 had made that clear in respect to operations during 1962.If on occasion bond prices declined and the System did not have a short-rate problem and was not in the market, he anticipated that there wouldsoon be a clear market understanding that the current operations in couponissues were of the same variety as the operations in 1961 and 1962Askec whether he felt that commercial banks might have been ledto feel justified in extending their portfolio maturities in relianceon Federal Reserve operations, Mr. Stone said he thought not. On thecontrary, he believed that the market retained a healthy skepticismabout long-term rates. There seemed to be a general expectation thatshort rates had about reached a level where they might continue forsome time, along with some expectation of increases in long-term rates.In further discussion of this point, Mr. Hickman agreed thatmoney market banks might be quite sophisticated about this matter andanticipate an ultimate adjustment in long-term rates. However, somecountry banks, at least in the Fourth District, were being lured intolonger maturities by the plateau in long-term rates. Some of them hadtalked to him about this, and he had warned them against proceeding onsuch an assumption. Mr. Wayne referred to the case of a reserve citybank in the Fifth District that did not have any maturities under oneyear, perhaps none under two years, apparently relying heavily onexpectations with regard to Federal Reserve operations. 8/20/63 -15-In response to an inquiry about the further availability ofcoupon issues to the Account, Mr. Stone said that more were available.The volume of offers each day ran from $150 to $300 million. The Desktried consistently to remain a marginal participant in whatever part ofthe market it conducted operations.Mr. Bopp noted that he had been a participant in the morningopen market telephone conference call during the past period. To in-dicate the type of problems that had been faced, he observed that asof Friday the estimate was for net borrowed reserves of something like$30 million, weekly average. Had this persisted and such a figure beenpublished, various interpretations would have been placed upon it.However, a supplying of reserves through the bill market would have hadsome effect on the bill rate, which was no higher than desired. Therefore,the Desk went into coupon issues. It was a complicated thing that theDesk was trying to achieve, and he felt it had performed well under thecircumstances,Mr. Stone estimated that in the absence of the operations incoupon issues, reserves would have had to be about $100 million lower.on average to achieve the same results in terms of the bill rate.Chairman Martin mentioned that some market participants withwhom he had talked had at first been very skeptical about operationsdesigned to bolster the short rate and keep the long rate from rising.Rather interestingly, however, they now appeared to have more respect 8/20/63 -16-for such operations than previously. The Chairman also observed thatgreater loan demand at banks could change the picture rather quickly.The expectations of bankers regarding loan demand were not yet beingfulfilled.. The demand might come quite suddenly, but it had not ap-peared thus far.Asked whether it would be fair to say that the System purchasesof coupon issues did not push up the price of coupon issues and thatwhatever impact the purchases had was to prevent a decline in suchprices, Mr. Stone replied that he thought this was probably right. Hedoubted, however, that the declines would have been very great. Theprices of issues from 1965 on out showed a gain of only one or twothirty-seconds, and other issues showed a decline of one or twothirty-seconds. In the absence of the System operations, he guessedthere might have been a decline of eight or ten thirty-seconds.Thereupon, upon motion duly madeand seconded, and by unanimous vote, theopen market transactions in Governmentsecurities and bankers' acceptances duringthe period July 30 through August 19, 1963,were approved, ratified, and confirmed.The Chairman then called for the usual staff economic andfinancial reports beginning with Mr. Noyes, who presented the followingstatement on economic developments:You may recall that I reported at the last meeting thatthe economy seemed to be moving along as well as, or perhapsa little better than, one might reasonably have expected, butthat this relatively good performance had not yet been fully 8/20/63reflected in businessmen's attitudes toward the period ahead.Since then, it appears that economic activity has generallycontinued to improve and that the lag in confidence andexpectations as to the future is rapidly being eliminated.In terms of the indicators of actual activity, we findpluses in both the current data and revisions of earlier monthsfor retail trade and industrial production. Further evidenceof better than expected performance is found in the upwardrevision of the new orders figures for June, the continuationof the record $64 billion rate of construction activity inJuly, some further pickup in employment, and continuing goodreports on second quarter profits.Evidence of the improved psychological climate can befound in the renewed bull movement in stocks and the strongbuying intentions expressed by onsuers in recent surveys.Adding further to confidence has been the strong behavior ofthe so-called leading indicators, which were "officially"interpreted at the Treasury consultants' meeting last week assignaling an upward movement in general activity for at leastsix to nine months to come. It may be worth noting, despitethe fact that their record as forecasters is not very impres-sive, that the academic economists at that Treasury meetingall seemed quite confident that business would continue toimprove through the remainder of the current year, and theyaddressed such critical comments as they had on current policyto its failure to close the gap between actual and potentialoutput, rather than to the danger of an imminent downturn.All this is not to say that the third quarter, as a whole,is not still likely to show less expansion than its predecessor--but only that most expectations had been geared to more flatten-ing out than has developed thus far. If markets carry theiroptimism too far, they are Likely to be disappointed by theAugust performance. Taking the production index as an example,present steel and auto production schedules, combined with asmuch expansion in other areas as we had in July, would onlyhold the index at its present level--not carry it up stillanother point.Thus we find ourselves in a situation very similar tothose which have occurred previously in this period of expansionand recovery. Economic activity is expanding, moderately on thewhole, as one sector after another seems to spurt forward andthen pause. There is no clear reason to suppose that it willdepart from this pattern in the period ahead. Business sentiment,or confidence, has been fluctuating more widely around thisalready undulating uptrend, and at the moment it seems to beimproving rather rapidly.-17- 8/20/63It is really impossible to relate these changes ingeneral economic conditions and sentiment to the recentmoderate shifts in Federal Reserve policy. As best we canmeasure it, there has been little or no significant changein the seasonally adjusted rate of monetary expansion.Thus, at least by this test, whatever the Committee's in-tentions may have been, there has been little or no shiftin policy of which to measure the impact. Much the samemight be said of long-term rates and credit availabilityin long-term capital markets. Whether by chance or bydesign, recent changes in credit cost and availabilityseem to have been limited to the short money market--whereone would not expect to find much impact on business activity.On the other hand, it is hard to relate the improveddomestic sentiment to any increase in confidence in the dollar.If anything, skepticism as to the adequacy of measures to pro-tect the dollar seems to have increased, both at home andabroad.I might add in passing that similar observations might bemade regarding fiscal policy. Measured by the current deficit,the Federal Government has been providing less stimulus to theeconomy than was expected--but it is hard to relate any of theshifts in output or sentiment to this phenomenon. It is evenhard to see any connection between the recent improvement andthe fact that the tax bill has finally made some tortuousprogress.Taken altogether, the evidence seems to suggest that theprivate sector of the economy is plodding ahead, not expectingor getting much help or hindrance fron monetary, fiscal, ordebt management policies. I would say that this performancetends to confirm the opinion--which I think everyone aroundthis table has expressed at one time or another--that, forbetter or worse, the economy has a considerable capacity toadapt to small changes in policy and take them in its stride.It would be a great mistake to leap from this observation tothe conclusion that the rate of activity is completely in-sensitive to changes in the monetary climate. As suggestedearlier, the general presumption has been that a firming ofrates and tone successfully quarantined in the short moneymarket sector should not have much effect on domestic invest-ment. That this judgment appears to be vindicated by recentdevelopments does not mean that a more generalized increase inrates and lessening of credit availability would not exert aconsiderable restraining influence on investment decisions. 8/20/63Mr. Brill presented the following statement on financial devel-apments:The past three weeks have provided a sharp test of moneymarket management in achieving multiple objectives, with whatappears to have been a substantial degree of success. Despiteerratic but on the whole rather moderate reserve needs, despiteLow dealer inventories early in the period, despite substantialnorbank demands for bills, and despite the absence of any thrustto an expectant market from debt management, bill rates havebeen moved up closer to the 3-3/8 per cent level and, with justa few days' exception, the Federal funds rate has been keptsnug against the discount rate. Long-term rates, on the otherhand, have been stable.These rate developments were accompanied by a shade morepressure on bank reserves. Required reserves supporting privatedeposits have stayed above the 3 per cent guideline, but by asomewhat narrower margin than in July. Excess reserves havebeen somewhat smaller than the average in July and member bankborrowings somewhat higher, yielding a free reserve average overthe first two weeks of this month below $100 million, comparedwith almost $160 million in July.Now we are entering a period in which a number of seasonalfactors are expected to be operating in the direction of easingthe task of maintaining the higher level reached by short-termrates. Nonbank demand for bills should be tapering off and thenturning to substantial supply, as dividend and tax payment datesapproach, and the impact on markets should be accentuated by thefact that dealer inventories have beer restored to more usuallevels from the very low point reached earlier this month. TheTreasury is expected to be adding to the supply of short-terminstruments, on net, through the new monthly cycle of one-yearbills and through a strip issue to sop up any demands for billswhich might arise from swapping operations in the yet-to-be-announced pre- and advance refundings.Reserve needs over the next three weeks will be substantial,first from month-end reduction in float and then from the currencyoutflow over the Labor Day week end, and all through this periodfrom the usual fall step-up in business loan demands. The ques-tion at the moment is whether these reserve needs can be met infull while maintaining upward pressure on bill rates. Theanswer is probably "yes," by artful meeting of reserve needs ona somewhat reluctant basis and, as far as possible, throughpurchases outside the short-term area. But the probability of-19- 8/20/63 -20-success is heavily weighted by the expectation of full strengthin the seasonal forces operating to increase the market supplyof bills and by the expectation of no adverse market developmentsarising from the Treasury's debt restructuring operations.It would be wise, however, to exercise some caution inassessing the strength of seasonal influences on which we maycount at this stage of the economic cycle. This is not tosuggest that I detect any note of weakness in the fundamentalsof the economy. As Mr. Noyes has pointed out, expansionaryforces continue far stronger than many had anticipated thisfar along in an upswing. Total output is running close to therate the Council of Economic Advisers had projected earlierthis year as the upper limit of expectations after a midyeartax cut. While there is no clear evidence pointing to a sharpacceleration in activity, neither is there any to suggest anymarked slowing from the 5 per cent annual rate at which dollarGNP appears to have increased so far this year.But even with continued expansion in economic activity,it is possible to get less than full seasonal pressures infinancial markets. As a result of high levels of activity andlast year's revision in business taxes, the internally generatedflow of corporate funds was in record volume in the first halfof the year while investment spending remained at or below 1962levels. Corporations apparently did not use their surpluses toadd to liquid asset holdings--in fact, it is estimated that they mademore that seasonal reductions in these assets--but they did reducesharply their dependence on external financing both from banksand from the capital markets.One can only speculate about more recent developments in thecorporate financial picture, but there is nothing in the data onsales and costs to suggest any reduction in profits in this thirdquarter. Even if spending for irventories and plant and equipmentshould rise to the levels projected earlier by businesses, depend-ence on external financing and pressure to liquidate financialasset holdings are likely to be small this autumn compared to thestrong demands for credit that developed in the late summer andfall of last year. It would take substantially more of a rise inspending than is currently projected to put much of a pinch onthe fund. of the business sector, and the sluggish business loandemands of recent weeks andthe dearth of new corporate securityissues on the calendar suggest that such a pinch has not yetoccurred. Federal financing needs are also running less than wasprojected earlier, and the high level of the Treasury balance ata time when the Treasury is seeking a further extension of thedebt ceiling is limiting debt management's use in support ofshort-term rates. 8/20/63The flow of consumer savings to financial institutionsseems to be slackening somewhat from the peaks of late 1962and early 1963, but it is still at historically high levels.The consumer sector as a whole has absorbed much of its ownsaving through the rising incurrence of mortgage debt, andthere are no signs of any diminution in this loan demand.One can wonder, however, whether the rise in consumer credit,which alo has absorbed more savings this year than last,will be sustained short of some--as yet unobserved--substantialeasing in terms.To summarize and perhaps oversimplify, at current levelsof interest rates, at current propensities to spend and invest,and with the current total and composition of tax burden, theeconomy is still tending to generate demands for financialassets faster than demands for borrowed funds. The reluctantdownward pressure on interest rates cannot be alleviated by theclassic 19th century device of permitting funds to flow abroadat a faster rate. One alternative, increasing domestic creditdemands at prevailing interest rates, apparently has to continueto wait on some stimulus from fiscal policy. The other alternativeis to reuce the supply of funds flowing into domestic creditmarkets, at least that supplement to saving flows supplied by thecentral bank. So far, our policies haven't reduced this supple-ment, but rather have made it more expensive to obtain and moretemporary in nature, by forcing the growth in bank reserves tocome largely from the discount window rather than the tradingdesk. Whether this will be adequate to sustain the present ratestructure in the context of continued moderate credit demandsseems doubtful. Perhaps not in the three-week period immediatelyahead, when so many factors will be operating to sustain rates,but later in the month when some of the seasonal factors startrunning against us, it is possible that the twin targets ofcontinue credit availability and high short-term rates willprove more difficult to reconcile.Mr. Sammons presented the following statement with respect to theU. S. balance of payments:According to preliminary monthly data, the balance ofpayments deficit in July was considerably reduced from the highsecond quarter rate.. With the French and Dutch advance repay-ments, and some benefit from the reversal of end-of-June windowdressing, there was actually a small surplus. Without thesespecial influences, and making some allowance for seasonalfactors, the "gross" deficit was probably under $200 million--still-21- 8/20/63uncomfortably high, but much reduced from the $400 million-per month second quarter rate.However, the partial weekly data--which are frequentlyquite misleading--show a $190 million deficit again for thefirst two weeks in August, still slightly better than thesecond quarter rate, after rough allowance for seasonal factors.However, it seems clear that, at best, we are still operatingin the $3-4 billion a year deficit range.We do not yet have any direct data on the factors--tradeor capital movements--accounting for the somewhat improvedJuly position. It is, therefore, still too early to say withany confidence what effect the discount rate rise and thePresident's balance of payments message have had on our balanceof payments. Perhaps all that can yet be said was said here byMr. Hersey three weeks ago: "the initial effects have not beenclearly favorable for the U. S. balance of payments outlook."Activity in the market for new foreign issues has beenrelatively limited in the last month. It is not clear to whatextent this situation represents the normal seasonal lull andto what extent it represents a reaction to the interest equaliza-tion tax proposal. But the latter has certainly produced awidespread feeling of uncertainty in the market.It must be remembered that long-term interest rates in manyforeign countries whose securities are not exempt from the proposedtax exceed rates in the United States by about 1 per cent per annumor more. Thus, unless alternative sources of funds are forthcoming,some borrowers may still come into the U. S. market even if theirissues are subject to the tax.Data on short-term capital movements in July are not yetavailable, but the recent rise in short-term interest rates inthe United States has not yet resulted in narrowing interestrate differentials to an extent that might be expected to havea major effect on capital movements. The uncovered differencebetween the U. K. and U. S. Treasury bills dropped about 35basis points from late June to the present; but on a coveredbasis there was little change as the discount on forward sterlingnarrowed. The covered advantage on Canadian Treasury bills hasdropped from about 30 basis points to zero due entirely to awider discount on the forward Canadian dollar. The interest rateon 90-day Euro-dollar deposits continues to exceed the U. S. billrate by about 70-90 basis points, and is presently about 60 basispoints above the rate offered by U. S. bankF on marketable certif-icates of deposit.Nor do we find any great encouragement in the movement ofexchange rates. The U. S. dollar has strengthened against the-22- 8/20/63Canadian dollar and, to a much lesser degree, against sterling.On the other hand, the dollar has required significant supportagainst the Swiss franc, and other Continental currencies haveremained firm. Reserve gains in July were again large forGermany ($70 million) and for France (over $200 million beforethe debt repayment).The Bank of Canada's action to raise its discount rate to4 per cent effective August 12 had only a very temporarystrengthening effect on the Canadian dollar. Canadian short-term rates have moved up about the same as U. S. rates;Canadian long-term rates have also risen somewhat, thusslightly widening the difference between U. S. and Canadianyields at that end of the market.Whatever may be the effects of policy measures alreadytaken--or of others that may be taken--on capital movementsand government aid, from all points of view the most satisfac-tory solution to our balance of payments problem would involvean increase in our export surplus. Since there is no reasonto expect imports to decline--on the contrary, they will continueto rise as our output increases--this means larger exports. Thelatest trade figures, while moderately encouraging, do not yetshow any signs of a major breakthrough. As a matter of fact,June exports were down about 4-1/2 per cent from May, and, atan annual rate of $21.8 billion, were about equal to theaverage or the entire first half of the year, and about 4-1/2per cent above the 1962 average.It may be that the relatively more rapid rise in wagesand prices that has occurred in Europe, in the last 2-3 yearshas not yet been reflected in export prices to the full extentthat it will be--there are always some lags in these things.Nevertheless, it would be foolish to depend on additional helpfrom this quarter. The need for continuously and forcefullystrengthening the competitive position of U. S. goods in worldmarkets, if we are to secure a liberal solution to our problem,becomes increasingly evident, in my judgment.Chairnan Martin called at this point for the usual go-around ofcomments and views on economic conditions and monetary policy beginningwith Mr. Treiber, who presented the following statement:Over-all economic activity continued to push upward inJuly. The further rise in industrial production, despite thedownward influence of steel and auto output, the increase in-23- 8/20/63equipment production, the rise it outlays for commercial andindustrial building, and the increase in retail sales strengthenthe view, expressed by many at the last meeting of the Committee,that the domestic economy will advance further over the remainderof the year. There are still uncertainties with respect to theprospects for Federal income tax reduction this year, the abilityof auto sales to sustain their recent high levels, and the abil-ity of other industries to offset the dampening effect onproduction that is likely to be exerted by reductions in steelinventories.Employment in July rose about 1/2 million to reach a newhigh. But the labor force rose by almost the same amount. Thusunemployment declined only slightly.The United States balance of payments deficit for thesecond quarter of 1963 was extraordinarily bad, amounting toabout a $5 billion annual rate. The large increase in thedeficit between the first and second quarters was caused to aconsiderable extent by expanded private capital outflows, afactor which can be most readily influenced by monetary policy.The surplus in July was greatly influenced by large debt pre-payments by France and the Netherlands, by the liquidation ofwindow-dressing operations undertaken by U. S. banks with foreignbanks over the midyear statement date, and by the reaction in theCaradian exchange market to the interest equalization tax proposedby the President in mid-July. Without those favorable factors,the July deficit would have been much less than the secondquarter deficit rate, but still above the first quarter deficitrate. Sizable deficits have been reported for the first half ofAugust.The increase in the discount rate and the increase in themaximum permissible rates under Regulation Q have had a favor-able effect on the dollar in the foreign exchange market. Thesituation has been complicated a d confused, however, by theinterest equalization tax proposal.The increase in the Canadian discount rate last week andsubsequent adjustments in Canadian money market rates have re-duced, as regards Canada, the effect of our own rate increase.Euro-dollar rates have risen about 1/4 per cent since early July.Most European money markets have shown little change. Monetaryconditions in Europe remain tight on the whole.Seasonal adjustment problems make it difficult to appraisechanges in total bank credit this summer. To date, however, themeasures taken to strengthen our balance of payments appear tohave had little impact on the availability of credit. Whilethere has been some reduction in marginal reserve availability,-24- 8/20/63real estate and consumer loans have been rising, and theinvestment by banks in municipal securities continues to besubstantial. The demand for business loans, however, remainsslack, and there is some question as to whether consumercredit may be approaching a temporary peak or a plateau.Corporate liquidity continues to be ample. Bank liquidityshowed little change in July.Sensitive short-term interest rates have risen sub-stantially. Since early June the average issuing rate on thecompetitive bidding for three-month Treasury bills has risennearly 3/8 per cent. Secondary market rates for three-monthcertificates of deposit have risen by 40 to 50 basis points.Federal funds rates have been close to the new discount rate,and dealer loan rates have been substantially higher. On theother hand, long-term rates have shown virtually no change.Money market developments since the last meeting of theCommittee have contributed to the effectiveness of the in-creased discount rate. For balance of payments purposes, theSystem has taken the important steps of raising the discountrate and of using open market operations to put upward pressureon short-term interest rates. The results to date of thesesteps are encouraging. I believe that it is important thatopen market operations continue to be conducted so as tocontribute most effectively to an improvement in the capitalaccount cf our balance of payments.Some further modest increase in short-term rates wouldseem desirable. I would suggest a three-month Treasury billrate at 3-3/8 per cent or higher, with Federal funds sellingconsistently at the discount rate. We should continue to buyintermediate- and long-term issues to supply reserves, wheresuch purchases are feasible and the short-term rate situationmakes it advisable.The Treasury plans to announce a new issue of $1 billionone-year bills tomorrow. I understand that it is prepared toannounce an offering of a strip of about $1 billion billssimultaneously with any announcement it may make of advancerefunding in the period ahead. Such financing in the Treasurybill area should provide a welcome offset to the downward ratepressures that will be exerted by the System in meeting theheavy reserve needs ahead.I think that the economic policy directive should beretained in its present form in order to assure continuedprogress toward a level of short-term market rates that isclearly consistent with the recent increase in the discountrate. 8/20/63 -2.6-Mr. Shuford said that since the last Committee meeting therehad been no significant change in the trend of economic conditions inthe Eighth District. The economic improvement, which had been under waysince the first of the year, generally paralleled expansion on thenational level. Employment in the District's major labor markets was up,and industrial use of electric power was continuing the upward movementthat began early in the year. Bank deposits and business loans leveledoff in July but had shown a substantial increase since the first of theyear.The recent advance in the national economy had been facilitatedto some degree, in Mr. Shuford's judgment, by monetary expansion duringthe past year, and he believed that a continuing reasonable monetaryexpansion would be desirable as a further aid to economic progress.Steps to increase short-term rates in recent weeks appeared to have beensuccessful, but it seemed to him it would not be desirable, throughmonetary policy, to attempt to push rates much higher than the recentlevels. While he favored the recent increase in the discount rate, hethought monetary policy had made, for the time being, an appropriatecontribution to the balance of payments problem. Any further increasein short-term rates might cause other central banks to raise theirrates, thereby offsetting the action taken here. While the President'srecent balance of payments message to Congress with respect to actionstaken was encouraging, he continued to believe that more positive actions 8/20/63 -27-should be taken in areas other than monetary policy such as Governmentexpenditures abroad. Primary reliance on monetary policy for an extendedperiod could result in the postponement of fundamental corrections.As to monetary policy for the immediate future, Mr. Shuford saidhe would not attempt to hold free reserves and member bank borrowings atany particular levels. If the bill rate remained at recent levels, andhe believed it should--3-3/8 per cent would not be excessive--banksmight undertake to reduce borrowings and sell bills. If, in order tokeep banks in debt, the System should limit its purchases, bank reservesand the money supply presumably would decline. In his opinion, thissort of development should be avoided. As he saw it, the aim should beto maintain short-term interest rates at about recent levels and, to theextent possible, supply the banking system with reserves sufficient toallow the money supply to increase at about the rate of the past year--3-3/4 to 3-1/2 per cent. In the light of current business conditions,and with seasonal factors exerting an upward pressure on rates duringmost of the remainder of the year, such a policy of supplying reserveswould not seem likely to result in a decline in short-term rates.Mr. Shuford went on to say that he would not favor a change inthe discount rate, and that he would not urge any drastic change in thepolicy directive. However, the word "increase" in the second line ofthe first paragraph might be dropped, and the second paragraph could beredrafted to call for open market operations to be conducted with a view 8/20/63 -28-to maintaining about the current degree of money market firmness,rather than a slightly greater degree of firmness.Mr. Bryan reported that statistics for the Sixth District didnot seem to differ significantly from the national statistics. Wherethey did differ, it was largely in the field of financial items.Changes in demand deposits, currency, and time deposits from a yearago had gone from a plus figure to a negative figure, contrary to thenational trend. The same thing was true of the money supply, narrowlydefined. There had been a decline in loans, at member banks, and adecline in loans and investments. The unemloyment situation wasapparently better than in the nation as a whole.Turning to policy considerations, Mr. Bryan noted that in thelast half of July there had been a growth o. 3.6 per cent from a yearago in the money supply, which was the greatest change from year-earlierfigures since January 1962. There was an 8 per cent increase if timedeposits were included. When it came to reserves, total reserves sincelast May showed a 6.7 per cent increase. Required reserves showed a 6.8per cent increase; nonborrowed reserves a 4 per cent increase. He couldnot see that, in the longer run,. the System could give effect to theshift in policy that was decided on in May, and was signalled morerecently by the discount rate increase, without lowering substantiallythe growth and availability of reserves. In light of that belief, andin the absence of economic reasons for retreating from the present postureof policy, he felt that the System must begin lowering availability of 8/20/63 -29-reserves. He was not certain how to translate that suggestion in termsof total reserves or any other reserve figures. If put in terms offree reserves., however, he would advocate fluctuating around a centraltarget of zero.Mr. Bopp reported that the Third District's participation innational business improvement was spotty. While recent labor forcedevelopments had been mildly favorable, output and demand indicatorswere lagging badly. The northern an western portions of the Districtseemed to be bumping a descending ceiling of economic potential, andtheir performance was not helped by concentration in certain industries,notably the production of apparel.Except for one week, the policy of less ease had reflected itselfin a basic reserve deficit at Third District city banks. Borrowing fromthe Reserve Bank, however, had been light. Loan demand was still ratherweak; for the year to date, loans of weekly reporting banks had risen byabout a third less than in the same period last year.So far the experiment that the Comittee had launched seemed tobe working, Mr. Bopp said. Given the decision to seek higher short-termrates, it was gratifying that longer term rates had not risen. Andreserve availability, as measured by free reserves and total reserves,had been maintained. On the other hand, the volume of borrowing, whichmight be a better clue to credit tightening at this juncture, was rising. 8/20/63 -30-The increase in the Canadian bank rate was disturbing, Mr. Boppadded. Despite official assurances that this was purely a technicalmove, and granting that the Canadian situation was somewhat special,still it illustrated the kind of pressures that could nullify thebalance of payments effects of higher rates here. If other countriesin time followed suit and this country attempted to keep pace, theupward movement in rates not only could greatly aggravate the domesticeconomy but could lead to world-wide difficulties as well.Mr. Bopp expressed the view that since short-term rates wereabout at the levels previously intended, the Desk should now concentrateon keeping the reserve supply as large as possible and borrowing as smallas possible. If short-term rates tended to slip, he would prefer to meetthe situation by purchases of coupon issues and sales of bills, and byTreasury action to increase the supply of short-term debt, rather thanby reducing the availability of funds. He would not change the discountrate at this time. As to the current policy directive, he would urgethat it be modified along the lines suggested by Mr. Shuford to avoid the.cumlative effect of "a slightly greater degree of firmness."Mr. Hickman commented that steel output had shown only minorchanges in recent weeks, both in the nation and in the Fourth District.An estimate had been made that steel ingot output in August for thecountry as a whole would aggregate 95 million ingot tons, at a seasonallyadjusted annual rate, which would represent the largest month-to-monthdecline this year. According to confidential reports received from 8/20/63 -31-several major steel producers, orders picked up more than seasonallyin July, and only slightly less than seasonally during the first halfof August. Reserve Bank analysts and others estimated that weeklyingot production would not show significant improvement until the thirdweek in September. Earlier, a turn had been anticipated three weekssooner.Domestic new car sales declined during the first ten days ofAugust, largely because of a maldistribution of dealer stocks and ashortage of popular lines. Basic demand for new cars apparently hadcontinued strong, inasmuch as used car prices climbed in July, afterseasonal adjustment. Based on preliminary estimates of domestic salesof 550,000 units in August, production of 160,000 units, and exportsof 12,000 units, inventories by the end of the month would probablydrop by 40 per cent, and would he below the levels of most recent goodautomobile years, including 1955.Mr. Hickman went on to say that as Mr. Noyes had indicated, thecombined weakness in autos, auto part , and iron and steel was equivalentto a drop of about one-half of a point in the Board's production indexin July, but this was more than offset by advances in other componentsequivalent to 1.4 index points. In August, the Reserve Bank expected adecline in the same areas of weakness equivalent to 1 to 1-1/2 indexpoints. Thus, all other forms of output would have to advance as muchin August as in July for the total index to stand still. However, it 8/20/63 -32-was now becomLng clear that, contrary to misgivings previously expressedin many circles, the production inde in the third quarter would averageat least as high as in the second quarter. In the fourth quarter, hewould expect the index to rise because of basic strength in demand forautos and the related demand for steel.Turning to the employment situation in the Fourth District,Mr. Hickman reported that the increase in the seasonally adjusted rateof insured unemployment, which was expected in the steel centers, finallybecame evident in early August in various areas, including Cleveland,Steubenville-Weirton, Lorain-Elyria, Canton, Youngstown-Warren, Pittsburgh,and Hamilton-Middletown; other centers showed continued improvement.The net effect of the cutback in steel in the District thus far had beenslight, and the District's insured unemployment rate continued belowthat of the nation and substantially below a year ago. With the up-grading of the Canton labor market in July, only four of the fourteenlabor market areas in the District remained in the "substantial laborsurplus" category, a proportion roughly similar to that of the rest ofthe country.So far as banking and monetary statistics were concerned, Mr.Hickman said it appeared to him that reserve availability remainedexcessive, despite a minor decline in net free reserves in recent weeksand a moderate rise in member bank borrowing. Both total reserves andreserves available to support private deposits increased considerably 8/20/63 -33-from June to July; and actual required reserves continued above thestandard guideline. Both the money supply and time deposits increasedsmartly in July.Mr. Hickman noted that banks had continued to acquire largeamounts of municipal securities, real estate loans, and other longer-term, less-liquid, higher-yielding assets. The large amount of fundsflowing into longer-term municipals in recent weeks could, in hisopinion, be explained in part by expectations of a pegged structure ofrates generated by recent System operations. Should these expectationsprove unwarranted, some Fourth District banks might be in serious dif-ficulty. Moreover, the System would find itself increasingly limitedin the flexibility of its operations the longer present operations werecontinued.Mr. Hickman added that he was refering specifically to opera-tions of the Desk thus far in August. According to his records theSystem purchased intermediate and long-term Governments on August 1, 2,5, 8, 15, and 16 and sold bills on August 7, 8, 9, 13, and 15. The neteffect was to twist the yield curve up on the short end and down on thelong end. The Committee's policy directive provided for a slightlygreater degree of firmness in the money market but said nothing aboutan easier tone in the long-term market.Mr. Hickman expressed the view that the Committee should continueto press for reduced reserve availability, should instruct the staff to 8/20/63 -34-lower its guidelines, and should abandon the twist operation. If, ashe hoped, the Desk was instructed to shift from a pegged to a freestructure of interest rates, this should either be announced publiclyor should be made clear to the market through a demonstration of thereadiness of the System to sell as well as buy long Governments in themarket. He saw no reason to change the directive as currently worded,provided it was adhered to. Otherwise, he felt that the directiveshould be revised to indicate that the System was engaging in a twistoperation.Mr. Hickman also brought out that beginning in late August itwould be necessary for the System to inject large amounts of reservesto take care of seasonal needs. If conducted through the open market,this would put downward pressure on money rates, which could have anadverse effect on the balance of payments position. The Board ofGovernors might wish to consider the alternative of a slight reductionin reserve requirements. Any offsetting adjustments, if needed, couldbe effected through sales of intermediate and long Governments, as wellas Treasury bills; this would reduce the pressure on gold reserves.Mr. Mitchell commented that the business situation seemed tohave developed better this summer than he had expected. The economyapparently had absorbed the contractive effect of the steel inventoryadjustment. About the same levels of output and activity as in thefirst part of the year appeared likely to continue for the balance of 8/20/63 -35-the year. This meant, of course, that little or no contribution wasbeing made, at this level of activity, toward cutting down the gapbetween capacity and performance. Many people, he observed, believedthat the only way the gap could be narrowed was through changes in thetax structure.The present posture of the System was not entirely to his liking,Mr. Mitchell said, but it was up to the System to find out how effectivethis posture was going to be. Thus far there was no evidence that itwas damaging the domestic economy, and no evidence that it had improvedthe balance of payments situation. The only clear evidence was that theGovernment, and perhaps some short-term borrowers, were sustaininghigher interest costs than before. More evidence was needed beforecoming to any firm conclusions. It would be unfortunate, he added, ifthere were further upward movements in foreign bank and money rates.As to the directive, Mr. Mitchell felt that Mr. Shuford had madea sensible suggestion. Also, he agreed with Mr. Hickman that the directiveshould contain some reference to System operations in long-term securities,if such operations were to be continued. The Manager should not beplaced in a position where he seemed to be operating without specificinstructions from the Committee.Mr. Shepardson commented that the outlook was encouraging tohim so far as domestic economic activity was concerned. In his opinion,the recent change in monetary policy was in the right direction and 8/20/63 -36-should be continued; monetary expansion still appeared greater thanjustified.Mr. Shepardson did not think the solution to closing the gapbetween performance and potential capacity was to be found in increasingthe money supply. That was not to say that it should be curtailed orcut back, but he questioned the rate of expansion, feeling that thetendency had been to press more on the money supply than on otherfactors. He had been concerned for a considerable time about the lipservice given to the continuing underutilization of resourses[sic]. In thefirst place, he was not sure how usable the unutilized capacity was,either in terms of plant and equipment or labor. There were not goingto be more jobs for unskilled labor if the main interest was in eccnomicprogress and growth. Efforts should be made to stimulate investment innew development rather than thinking about going back to a fullerutilization of obsolete equipment and unskilled labor. To obtain this,there must be adequate profit incentives, which meant containment ofcost increases. Fundamentally, an increase in employment was not goingto be obtained by increasing wage rates. What was needed was a stand-still in wage rates to allow American businesses to become morecompetitive, thus increasing activity at home and improving the balanceof payments situation. A way must be found of containing wage crawlsuntil a higher level of employment was attained. More attention alsoshould be given to minimizing some of the disincentives to employment-- 8/20/63 -37-making it too easy for folks to hunt for jobs where they knew they wouldnot find them. A lot of people will resist making efforts to findemployment as long as they can get by without too much discomfort.Many of the existing programs tended to make it possible for peopleto avoid the burden of qualifying themselves for available jobs, thusperpetuating unemployment.Mr. Shepardson said he realized this was outside the sphere ofmonetary policy. The changes had to come elsewhere. However, he didnot think the situation was helped by attempting to provide a curethrough monetary policy. Monetary policy had been more than easy, andthe rate of monetary expansion should be slowed down. On that basis,he would favor retaining the existing directive, thus continuing toexert some additional pressure. It also seemed to him that whatever mayhave been accomplished by the twist operation, there was a limit at somepoint. He was not at all sure but that this point had been reached.Perhaps the Committee should now allow the whole range of interest ratesto find normal levels and relationships.Mr. Robertson said that, as everyone knew, he had had gravedoubts about the bill-rate policy that the Committee had been following.He doubted that it would have any important bearing from the standpointof the balance of payments problem, and he thought it could have anadverse effect on the domestic economy by hampering expansion. Hethought, also, that it would sooner or later result in an increase in 8/20/63 -38-long-term rates. Likewise, he felt that the tinkering operations inwhich the Committee was engaging would create long-run problems. Thequicker they were terminated the better. At the same time, it wouldbe unwise for the Committee to flop back and forth from one positionto another. Having arrived at the position of the moment, he wouldsuggest staying put and maintaining in even keel. He would not agreeto retention of the present directive, which provided for continuingto move into a tighter position. He would, however, accept the directivewith Mr. Shuford's change, which looked toward maintaining an even-keelposition pending a re-evaluation of the effects of present policy atthe next Committee meeting or thereafter.Mr. Mills said he continued to hold the views he had expressedat recent Committee meetings. There were circumstances prevailing, henoted, that were beyond the control of the Federal Reserve System;actions, or lack of appropriate actions, in the fiscal area of theGovernment's responsibilities had shifted the burden of combatting thebalance of payments problem onto the Federal Reserve. That being thecase, he believed the System was committed to carrying on the policynow in effect, with the full knowledge that it was replete with risksand economically undesirable. As to the technical side of operations,he believed the Committee's only choice was to make effective thepolicy that had been chosen by the Committee. But if that was thecourse decided upon, it was probable that the supply of reserves would 8/20/63 -39-be contracted. Along with the contraction, it was reasonable toanticipate that the level of required reserves would shrink, and atthe same time that excess reserves and free reserves would rise. Iffree reserves did rise, that would, of course, place a softening effecton bill rates; this was a development that would have to be accepted.If an increase of free reserves due to a reduction of required reserveswas taken as a signal to absorb reserves, that would compound thepressure on the supply of reserves and the availability of creditseverely and unnecessarily. He had complete sympathy with Mr. Hickman'sdesire to break loose from the pegging operation being followed in theconduct of the System Open Market Account. In bygone days, SenatorJohn Sherman of Ohio, when it came time to consider the resumption ofspecie payment and there was great concern that the resumption would bedisruptive to the economy, said "the time to resume is to resume." At amore appropriate time that might be an example to follow with respect todiscontinuing the pegging operation.Mr. Wayne reported that business activity in the Fifth Districtremained generally at a high level and had changed very little in thepast three weeks. Current strength was particularly apparent in bituminouscoal, where production and shipments in recent months had been the largestsince 1957 with the outlook favoring further gains, and in construction,where contract awards for the first half-year reached a new high in spiteof a sharp decline in June. No significant signs of weakening were 8/20/63 -40-currently visible in any of the principal manufacturing industries.Furniture makers had a year and a half of prosperity behind them andexpected a better second half this year than last. Textilemen reportedthat order backlogs for large-volume gray goods were now in generallysatisfactory condition for the rest of this year. Cigarette manufacturerscontinued to meet a gradually rising demand despite the growing volumeof adverse publicity. Only the farmers were complaining, and with goodcause. The extended drought had dried up pastures, forcing some to selltheir herds, and the outlook had deteriorated for many crops.According to the Reserve Bank's latest survey, business sentimentwas more diverse now, and on balance a little less optimistic, despiteindications of more confidence among the reporting bankers. Respondentsin the manufacturing sector reported business about the same, but theflow of new orders had slowed a little. The survey also showed, w;.thsome support from other sources, that recent good levels of retail tradewere being maintained or improved.Turning to national business conditions, Mr. Wayne observed thatbusiness activity was apparently continuing to move ahead, but that in-dicators of future activity seemed to be mixed and indecisive. Duringthe first half of this year the economy performed better than mostauthorities had predicted. The pattern of changes was much the sameas prevailed in the first half of 1962, but the gains were smallereverywhere except in the industrial area, where they were distinctly 8/20/63 -41-larger.. In recent weeks the economy had shown considerable strengthin maintaining momentum despite the ,harp cutback in steel, the tenseinternational financial situation, domestic racial disturbances, anduncertainties about fiscal policy. Somewhat larger backlogs ofmanufacturers' unfilled orders and accumulated construction contractshad contributed extra strength this year. It might be that these andother elements inherent in the present situation would be sufficientto insure a second-half performance better than the unimpressive recordof the last half of 1962, but it was too early to be sure. At themoment, Mr. Wayne saw no obvious reason to expect that there would beany significent change in the period immediately ahead.In the policy area, Mr. Wayne commented that the money markethad about completed its transition, and the structure of short-termrates was now approximately in line with the new discount rate. The billrate had lagged somewhat in making the adjustment because of a strongdemand for bills. Thus far the rate adjustments were about the onlyimportant domestic reactions to the change in the discount rate.Internaionally, there were significant increases in the rates on theEuro-dollar and in short-term rates in Canada, but covered spreads hadchanged little.Mr. Wayne went on to say that with the rate structure in adjust-ment at the new and higher level, the pertinent question was whetherthe structure should be raised or lowered. The domestic situation 8/20/63 -42-certainly did not suggest a need for further tightening. If theCommittee was, in the words of its present directive, "to accommodatemoderate growth in bank credit," as he thought it should, free reservesshould not be allowed to drop any lower at present. In fact, in termsof reserves that could actually be mobilized, there probably had notbeen any real free reserves for the past month or more. On the inter-national front, any further rise in rates here would probably stimulateincreases in market rates abroad and might encourage or even forceofficial actson to raise rates. Mr. Wayne felt, also, that it wasappropriate, if not essential, to watch developments on the interestequalization tax proposal and any results that might occur. Consequently,he favored a policy of maintaining about the present degree of firmnessin the money market, which he interpreted to mean a structure of short-term rates approximately the same as had prevailed in the past few days,this to be accomplished, if possible, with a level of free reservesfluctuating in the area of $100 million. An appropriate change in thesecond paragraph of the current dire, tive would be needed to implementthis policy, and he agreed with the change suggested by Mr. Shuford.Mr. Clay commented that the Federal Reserve System had made itsmajor monetary policy move five weeks ago when it increased the discountrate, and since that time the Committee had been engaged in operationsto coordinate open market policy with the discount rate action. The jobhad been complicated by the twin goals of higher short-term rates and 8/20/63 -43-continued reserve availability. Any effort to move the short-term openmarket rates still higher presumably could be accomplished only by reduc-ing reserve availability and bank credit expansion and probably puttingupward pressure on longer term rates. It would appear well to avoidsuch action at this time, both in consideration of domestic economicneeds and in order to provide time for money and credit markets to adjustto the policy moves already made.Evidence concerning the performance of the domestic economy inthe early part of the third quarter was rather encouraging, but thebasic problems of the domestic economy continued essentially unchanged.Moreover, the task faced by public policy on that front also remainedessentially tnchanged as one of encouraging economic expansion. Itwould be well to keep in mind that what was a rather good performanceof the domestic economy as to the degree of expansion during thisbusiness upswing, despite problems of underutilization of resources,occurred under a monetary policy that had been comparatively easy. Theneed for further economic expansion and the resource availability foraccomplishing it constituted a serious argument against a reduction in therate of credit growth.Mr. Clay expressed the view that it also would be in order toallow more time for the money and capital markets to adjust to therecent monetary policy changes and to afford the System added opportunityto observe the subsequent developments in international financial indicators. 8/20/63 -44-There would appear to be merit in the idea of affording more time forinternational financial indicators, particularly relative interest ratesto adjust to t.he policy changes already made, thus giving the Systemgreater opportunity to observe the resulting developments.So far as giving evidence of making the discount rate effectivewas concerned, Mr. Clay saw nothing incompatible between the half pointincrease in the discount rate and the accompanying increase that hadtaken place in short-term open-market rates, nor was there any incon-sistency between a 3-1/2 per cent discount rate and the current levelof short-term market rates. The increase in open market rates must bemeasured beginning with the anticipatory movement preceding the discountrate change and not with the date of the discount rate change itself.Mr. Clay felt that for the time being monetary policy shouldcontinue its recent posture, with no change in the Committee's goals onshort-term rates and reserve availability. The Account Manager shouldstand ready to purchase longer-maturity issues to facilitate the Committee'sgoals, as well as to undertake offset'ing sales of Treasury bills andpurchases of longer-maturity issues. The directive, he thought, couldremain unchanged except for a modification in the second paragraph toavoid additional tightness in the money market. The wording suggestedby Mr. Shuford would be agreeable to him.Mr. Clay concluded his remarks by saying that the fundamentalquestion before the Committee continued to be the same as it had been 8/20/63 -45-for a long while, namely, not only what could be accomplished for theinternational balance of payments problem through monetary policy butalso whether any substantial impact could be had on the internationalflow of funds through monetary policy without moving domestic interestrates to levels that would involve serious monetary restraint on economicactivity.Mr. Scanlon reported that business prospects continued favorablein the Seventh District. The stronger trend evident in retail sales inJune appearec to have been about maintained in July and early August.The most promising recent development, other than the apparent uptrendin retail trade, was the surprising strength of construction. Man-ufacturing continued to lead, but recent months had witnessed a markedimprovement in housing starts in the District, especially in Milwaukeeand Detroit.The increase in bank credit for June and July as a whole atSeventh District banks was about the same as a year ago, and the netexpansion over the past six months matched the national experience--roughly 3-1/2 per cent. Consumer loans appeared to have been quitestrong recently, and District banks had also continued to increase realestate loans fairly rapidly. Business use of bank credit did not appearto be increasing, but the net decline in outstanding business loans overthe past two months was about the same as for the past several years.The normal seasonal influences had been dominant, but with a sharper 8/20/63 -46-than usual increase in borrowing by commodity dealers and somewhatgreater than normal declines in loans to manufacturing and retailingfirms.With the tighter credit conditions that had prevailed recently,the major Chicago banks had been borrowing more both in the Federal fundsmarket and at the discount window. In addition, they had reduced theirholdings of U. S. Government securities by about $150 million since mid-July. Chicago banks did not appear to be bidding actively for corporatefunds through. issuing short-term certificates of deposits.As to policy, Mr. Scanlon recalled that his preference at thelast Committee meeting had been to wait for the dust to settle beforemaking further moves, but this was merely a matter of timing. Sincethere was now a slightly greater degree of firmness in the money market,he would remain there. He believed there was room under an even-keelpolicy to attain the 3-3/8 per cent bill rate the majority favored atthe last meeting. Therefore, he would change the directive to providefor operations to be conducted with a view to maintaining the samedegree of firmness in the money market as at present. He would notchange the discount rate.Mr. Deming stated that in the first half of 1963 the NinthDistrict economic record compared quite favorably with that of the nation.Perhaps the best summary statistic to indicate this conclusion waspersonal income, which for the District in June was running 7 per cent 8/20/63 -47-ahead of a year earlier, as compared with a 5 per cent gain for theUnited States. Farm income had been quite favorable this year, and thisfact accounted for most of the difference between District and nation,although manufacturing activity in the District also had run relativelybetter. AvaiLable data for July pointed both ways. Industrial poweruse was up sharply from June, according to preliminary figures, whileemployment failed to show as much gain as would be normal. The EmploymentService people, incidentally, were not optimistic about the short-runemployment outlook. Debits were up strongly in July. The farm outlookwas quite good, with an excellent crop outturn now virtually assured.It would be a bit smaller than last year's record volume, but well aboveaverage.After a strong first half, particularly at country banks, bankloan demand in July was about in keeping with normal seasonal behavior.Fragmentary data for city banks in August pointed to some recent weaken-ing in loans. Investment behavior at District banks, like those in thenation, was influenced in June and July by the timing of Treasury finaneing. So far in August, growth in investments looked a little better thannormal. Total deposits fell contraseasonally in July, but this reflectedalmost entirely a decline in Government deposits that took funds out ofthe District. City banks had registered some seasonal deposit gains inthe past two weeks.Both bank borrowing from the Reserve Bank and Federal funds 8/20/63 -48-purchases increased significantly in Late July and early August, buthad subsided in the past week or so. The effect of the Comptroller'snew ruling on Federal funds transactions on Ninth District banks wasnot yet clear. It might lead to less frequent use of the discountwindow by the larger banks than would otherwise be the case undersimilar conditions of reserve availability.The national economic situation, Mr. Deming noted, evidentlywas gaining unexpected strength, and business and consumer confidenceseemed to be growing. The stock market apparently was mirroring thisfeeling. Whatever the effect on the payments balance of the somewhatsnugger money market conditions, they did not seem to have had anyadverse effect on the domestic economy so far. Should the presenteconomic trend continue and be augmented by seasonal factors, it wouldmake the task of credit policy implementation somewhat easier--assumingthat the Committee would want to continue its emphasis on competitiveshort-term interest rates. At the same time, he thought the Committeewas going to have to put more emphasis on reserve availability in orderto have more impact on capital flows abroad, particularly those frombanks. This, of course, also could come more from market forces thanfrom overt credit policy action. For the moment, however, he would becontent to stay "about where we are" in terms of money market conditions,free reserves, and short-term rates, although he would not resist afurther modest upward movement in such rates should the market itself 8/20/63 -49-supply the force to achieve the higher rates. As to the policydirective, the only change that seemed necessary would be to amendthe second paragraph to call for operations with a view to maintainingthe present degree of money market firmness.Mr. Swan said the available data for July, and more completedata for June, revealed the lack of vigor characteristic of importantsectors of the Twelfth District economy in recent months. Unemploymentrates rose rather substantially in July in California and Washington.In California this was primarily the result of an increase in the laborforce. In Washington this was a contributing factor, but there was alsoa less than seasonal gain in employment it agriculture, along withdeclines in Government and aircraft employment. In June, Arizona wasthe only District State to report a Lower rate of unemployment that inMarch. Also, District department store sales probably registered adecline for the second month in a row in July; however, sales remainedslightly above a year ago. New car registrations in California, wheresales had been strong in the first half of the year, were down about9 per cent for the first 18 days of July from a year earlier, comparedwith the year period gain in sales in July for the country as a whole.Construction awards in the District varied widely from month to monthbut showed a sharp net increase in the District for the first half ofthe year. Rental vacancies, however, rose sharply in the second quarter.With some resumption of lumber production already under way, and the 8/20/63 -50-end of the strike expected by mid-August, lumber prices were expectedto soften considerably. Canadian lumber production had increased totake advantage, of the strike, and additional supplies from that sourcewere still coming into U. S. markets.For the three weeks ended August 7, Twelfth District weeklyreporting banks reduced their investments considerably more than theyexpanded their loans. Thus, reserve positions were easier than in thepreceding three weeks, and net sales of Federal funds were at highlevels. For the week ended August 14, borrowings from the Reserve Bankwere quite low.Despite continuing improvement in the business picture nationally,Mr. Swan was not convinced that the domestic situation, taken by itself,warranted the present degree of lesser ease. The action had been taken,however, and this was not a time to retreat from the current position.But with the bill rate currently close to 3-3/8 per cent, the presentdegree of firmness should not be increased. The Committee also shouldawait the market and public reaction to the Treasury financing plansshortly to be announced, as well as some clearer indication of the fateof the tax reduction legislation.Mr. Swan said his suggestion for changes in the directivecorresponded with those mentioned by Mr. Shuford. He added that theSystem soon would be faced with the problem of supplying additionalreserves for seasonal expansion. He was quite interested in the comments 8/20/63 -51-of Mr. Brill and Mr. Hickman in this regard. The problem of themagnitude of these reserves, the extent to which the System would bereluctant to supply them, the form the supplying of reserves would takeas between security purchases and a reduction in reserve requirements--all these things presumably would have a considerable effect on therange of action likely to be open to the Committee in terms of generalopen market policy. At the moment, he would agree with Mr. Hickmarthat there would seem to be a case for a slight reduction in reserverequirements.Mr. Irons said that Eleventh District business conditions weregenerally at a high level. Most of the changes taking place were aboutin line with what might be expected on a seasonal basis. There wereuncertainties in some areas, such as agriculture and probably retailtrade, although the latter had improved recently. On the banking side,there was no evidence of strain or excesses one way or the other. Loanswere up moderately; time and savings deposits continued strong; invest-ments were down as the banks disposed of bills and certificates. Someimpact of the Comptroller's new ruling on Federal funds might be appearing;the few District banks that were active buyers of Federal funds had beenstepping up their purchases. There had been no appreciable use of thediscount window; borrowings were running about $9 million on a weeklyaverage.On the matter of the directive and policy for the next three 8/20/63 -52-weeks, Mr. Irons indicated he would lean toward maintaining the presentdirective, which would permit attaining a slightly greater degree offirmness in the money market. During the past three weeks the Deskhad performed well and had moved in the direction of achieving theobjectives indicated by the Committee. Whether by Desk or market action,the short-term rate had moved up some 10 basis points or more, whilelong-term rates were quite stable. 'Unquestionably the market had beenfirmer, but be was not aware of any evidence of undue tightness.Therefore, he would continue to seek a slightly greater degree of marketfirmness, although not aggressively. In other words, if market factorsand developments were such as to make for a slightly firmer market, hewould not object. If the bill rate went to 3-3/8 per cent, other short-term rates went up a bit, and Federal funds traded consistently at 3-1/2per cent, he would consider that a mcve in the right direction. Hewould be inclined to continue operations in the intermediate and longerterm areas whenever such operations were appropriate for System purposes.He did not know whether the assignment the System seemed to have in-herited could be accomplished, but he would not be prepared to say--atleast for the time being--that it could not be done; he would like tosee a little further experimentation. To put it another way, he wouldnot favor abandoning the twist operation if it seemed feasible to continuefor a while. Sooner or later, a point might be reached where free re-serves would have to be pushed lower, perhaps into negative free reserves. 8/20/63 -53-However, he did not believe that that point had yet been reached, andfor the next three weeks he would think in terms of free reserves some-where around $100 million or a little lower.Mr. Irons reiterated that he would accept the existing policydirective for the next three weeks. If the directive were changed tocall for maintaining the present degree of firmness, that would seemto impose on the Desk a responsibility to maintain only the presentdegree of firmness even though the short-term rate might tend upwardbecause of Treasury operations or for other reasons.Mr. Latham said that with the. exception of employment, theNew England economy appeared to be holding up well. Employment trendscontinued to show up less favorably than those for the country as awhole. Nonagricultural employment, seasonally adjusted, declined inJune for the fifth consecutive month, The 12-month net change, as ofJune, was an increase of only 1/10 of 1 per cent. Manufacturing em-ployment declined further in June, with a 12-month net decrease of 1.5per cent. The estimated unemployment rate, seasonally adjusted, rosefrom 5.2 per cent in May to 5.7 per cent in June.An important factor in the lack of vigor in New England employ-ment trends had been the relative weakness of the electrical machineryindustry, and more particularly the important electronics component.A 7,200 drop in employment in the electrical machinery industry for the12 months ended June 30 compared with a decrease of 9,000 jobs for all 8/20/63durable goods manufacturing industries and constituted about one-thirdof the 21,000 loss in jobs for all manufacturing. The electronicsindustry in New England, after experiencing a period of rapid growth,had apparently been going through a shakedown period, although most ofthe job loss appeared to be in the larger companies.Consumer spending continued at a good pace, as reflected bydepartment store sales, registrations of new automobiles, and resortarea business occasioned by excellent vacation weather.Construction was a strong factor in the New England economy.In June, nonresidential building contracts were up 69 per cent from ayear earlier; residential building contracts were up 24 per cent.Deposits in mutual savings banks and share accounts in insuredsavings and loan associations continued to grow at a good pace, althoughthe savings deposit increase at commercial banks slowed during the monthof July.Business loans at commercial banks had continued stronger thanseasonal since June. Through August 14, First District banks completedtheir fifth consecutive week as net purchasers of Federal funds. It wasinteresting to note that with the relative tightness that occurred onAugust 7, because of the temporary maldistribution of reserves, borrowingat the discount window was the heaviest for a single day since 1921.In conclusion, Mr. Latham noted that District bankers generallyvoiced accord with System monetary policy.-54- 8/20/63 -55-Mr. Balderston expressed agreement with the view of Mr.Sherpardson that it was a delusion to talk about the utilization ofcapacity, human and otherwise, that was not competitive in presentmarkets. He went on to say that his reaction to the small impact ob-servable thus far from the System's discount rate action was satisfactory.The covered rate differential between the United States and Canada andLondon had disappeared. However, the Euro-dollar market continued togive him concern. It appeared to him to be a threat to the financialstability of Europe, and in the end he felt it might have a seriousimpact upon the U. S. domestic economy by draining off short-term fundsin a manner that seemed to be beyond the control of central banks. Itseemed important that the flow of dollar deposits into this pool bediminished, and he feared there was a gap in the interest equalizationtax proposal for inhibiting the outflow of capital. The banks were notcovered, and they were seeking opportunities to put funds abroad.As to the domestic scene, the money supply had risen since thefirst of the year at an annual rate of 3-1/2 per cent, with turnover5 per cent above a year ago and bank credit still rising rapidly. True,since the first of the year total bank loans and investments had gone uponly 7 per cent, annual rate, compared with 8 per cent in the year 1962.The ratio of public liquid asset holdings to GNP in the second quarterwas 2 percentage points higher than a year ago. From February 1961 todate, total bank reserves had risen by 7.5 per cent. In the face of all 8/20/63this, he was quite content that nonborrowed reserves had remainedconstant since the beginning of the year. This was now leading memberbanks to increase their borrowings, a development that it seemed to himthe System might have to live with through the fall period.A point that intrigued him, though probably irrelevant to theformulation of a monetary policy decision, was the impact of the changingmix of demand and time deposits on the expansion potential of bank re-serves. In June of last year the ratio of time to total deposits subjectto reserve requirements was 4.13; this June it was 4.48. As a result,the amount of deposits supported by $100 million of reserves--with atime deposit reserve requirement of 4 per cent--was $970 a year ago,and $1,003 now. The increase was 3.4 per cent over a year ago, and9 per cent over June 1960.During the next three weeks, Mr. Balderston said, he would main-tain the prevailing firmness in the money market to aid the Treasury withits scheduled refunding. The second paragraph of the directive might bemodified to substitute wording in the third line such as: "maintainingthe prevailing degree of firmness." If there was to be a veering ofpolicy in either direction, he would veer in the direction of firmness,but he felt that any significant change might well be considered a littlelater.Chairman Martin commented that, as to policy for the period ahead,the Committee members appeared to be closer together than for some time,-56- 8/20/63 -57-although perhaps for varied reasons. He could not help but say, theChairman added, that in his judgment both the domestic economy and thebalance of payments had benefited from the present posture of Systempolicy, although that might take a couple of months to demonstrate.In view of the general sentiment concerning the domestic economy andapprehensions in the European market, he felt there might be possibilitiesof increased investment in the United States. There were the makings ofa change, even though it might take come time to develop. The interestequalization tax proposal had been received badly by the market, it.having been construed rather generally as a first step toward exchangecontrols, but he believed the sentiment might now be shifting in favorof the Treasury's position. It was his impression that the proposalmight get a better reception in the Congress than had seemed likelyearlier.The Chairman continued to feel that the balance of paymentsproblem was the greatest single shadow over the domestic economicpicture. He believed the posture of the System placed it in a fairlygood middle ground, and he questioned whether any further lessening ofease at this point would actually be of benefit. Instead, he wasinclined to feel that maintenance of the status quo probably was calledfor at the moment. As Mr. Balderston and others had pointed out, theTreasury was going to come into the market during the next few weeks.Whether the Treasury would decide on an advance refunding, he did not 8/20/63 -58-know; that was going to involve a rather difficult decision for theTreasury. In any event, however, it should be borne in mind that fora long period Treasury debt management policy had been-not only supple-mentary but complementary to Federal Reserve monetary policy. This wasa period when it would seem well to let the Treasury feel its way along,without additional complications, on whatever debt management decisionsit might make.Chairman Martin said that although he remained rather skepticalabout the so-called twist operation, he did not believe in changinghorses in the middle of the stream. The benefit of the doubt, hethought, should be given to the operation because it was directed towardhelping the alance of payments problem as much as possible and with aminimum of drag on the domestic economy.The Chairman added that he thought the Desk had performed wellin the past period. Certain market participants with whom he had talkedhad been impressed, despite their preconceptions, with the activities ofthe Desk. It seemed to him that, as he had said, it would be well togive the twist operation the benefit of the doubt and pursue it somewhatfurther.The Chairman also said that he would like to make a commentabout the word "peg," which was being used rather freely. He stillthought of a peg in the sense of standing ready to purchase securitiesany time the price reached a certain level. While he believed in a 8/20/63 -59-free market, he did not delude himself into thinking that Systemactivities were not bound to influence the market, although FederalReserve operations should be of a residual or marginal character.Chairman Martin concluded by saying that since the Treasury wasfacing a difficult period and since there appeared to have been someelement of success in what the System had done thus far, it would seemto him advisable to continue the status quo. The outcome was not clearbut the System would benefit in the sense that the whole world wouldrealize that the balance of payments problem was being tackled. If thecurrent program did not work, presumably other operations would beinstituted. For all of these reasons, he would favor maintaining thestatus quo for the time being.The Chairman then proposed that the question of policy for theperiod immediately ahead be considered by the Committee on the basisof continuing the first paragraph of the policy directive without changeand changing the second paragraph to read that open market operationsshould be conducted with a view to maintaining the prevailing degree offirmness in the money market, while accomodating moderate expansion inaggregate bank reserves.Thereupon, upon moticn duly made andseconded, the Federal Reserve Bank of NewYork was authorized and directed, untilotherwise directed by the Committee, toexecute transactions in the System Accountin accordance with the following currenteconomic policy directive: 8/20/63It is the Committee's current policy to accommodatemoderate growth in bank credit, while putting increasedemphasis on money market conditions that would contributeto an improvement in the capital account of the U. S.balance of payments. This policy takes into considerationthe continuing adverse balance of payments position and itscumulative effects and the high level of domestic businessactivity, as well as the increases in bank credit, moneysupply, and the reserve base in recent months. At the sametime, however, it recognizes the continuing underutilizationof resources.To implement this policy, System open market operationsshall be conducted with a view to maintaining the prevailingdegree of firmness in the money market, while accommodatingmoderate expansion in aggregate bank reserves.Votes for this action: Messrs. Martin,Balderston, Bopp, Clay, Irons, Mills, Mitchell,Robertson, Scanlon, Shepardson, and Treiber.Votes against this action: none.In a comment with respect to his vote, Mr. Treiber said he wouldunderstand that if the issuance by the Treasury of additional bills shouldresult in an increase in the short-term rate of some modest.amount, thatwould not be inconsistent with the directive.It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open MarketCommittee would be held on Tuesday, September 10, 1963.The meeting then adjourned.Assistant Secretary-60-