 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in theoffices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington on Tuesday, July 30, 1963 at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Martin, ChairmanMr. Hayes, Vice ChairmanMr. BalderstonMr. BoppMr. IronsMr. MillsMr. MitchellMr. RobertsonMr. ScanlonMr. ShepardsonMessrs. Hickman, Wayne, and Shuford, Alternate Membersof the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Ellis, Bryan, and Deming, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Boston, Atlanta, andMinneapolis, respectivelyMr. Young, SecretaryMr. Kenyon, Assistant SecretaryMr. Hackley, General CounselMr. Noyes, EconomistMessrs. Baughman, Brill, Eastburn, Garvy, Green,Holland, and Tow, Associate EconomistsMr. Stone, Manager, System Open Market AccountMr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open MarketAccountMr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of GovernorsMr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Hersey, Adviser, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMr. Yager, Chief, Government Finance Section,Division of Research and Statistics, Boardof GovernorsMiss Quick, Secretary, Office of the Secretary,Board of Governors 7/30/63Messrs. Patterson and Hemmings, First VicePresidents of the Federal Reserve Banksof Atlanta and San Francisco, respectivelyMessrs. Mann, Ratchford, Jones, Parsons, andGrove, Vice Presidents of the Federal Re-serve Banks of Cleveland, Richmond, St.Louis, Minneapolis, and San Francisco,respectivelyMr. Eisenmenger, Director of Research, FederalReserve Bank of BostonMessrs. Cooper and Meek, Managers of the Securi-ties Department, Federal Reserve Bank of NewYorkUpon motion duly made and seconded,and by unanimous vote, the minutes of themeetings of the Federal Open Market Com-mittee held on June 18 and July 9, 1963,were approved.Before this meeting there had been distributed to the Committeea report from the Special Manager of the System Open Market Account onforeign exchange market conditions and on Open Market Account andTreasury operations in foreign currencies for the period July 9 throughJuly 24, 1963, together with a supplementary report covering the periodJuly 25 through July 29, 1963. Copies of these reports have been placedin the files of the Committee.In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombsreviewed current and prospective developments with respect to the U. S.gold stock and summarized developments in the London gold market. Hewent on to say that judgment ahroad as to the proposed "interest equali-zation" tax on U. S. purchases of long-term foreign securities was stillhanging in the balance. On the one hand there was some feeling that the 7/30/63 -3-tax, by imposing a freeze on American purchases of foreign securities--new issues as well as outstanding--should have a strengthening effecton U. S. dollar rates. On the other hand there was a rather widespreadfeeling that the tax could be circumvented through bank term lendingand that a system of direct controls might eventuate.Mr. Coombs noted that in connection with the President's balanceof payments message on July 18, efforts had been made by foreign centralbanks, in conjunction with the efforts of the Federal Reserve and theTreasury, to keep up dollar rates, and if possible to show some improve-ment. These efforts had contrived to keep dollar rates fairly steadyexcept in the case of the Swiss franc. If the dollar went to the flooragainst the Swiss franc, that might have been regarded as a sign of noconfidence. Therefore, as spelled out in the written reports a varietyof measures were taken to try to hold up the dollar against the Swissfranc, but market pressures were strong enough to force a gradual de-cline in the dollar rate. In addition, a $5 million drawing underthe System's swap facility with the Swiss National Bank was proposedyesterday. owever, the National Bank had suggested holding off for aday or two, with the thought that the demand for Swiss francs mightease after the end of the month. There were indications of somespeculative content in the buying of francs, but continued tight moneymarket conditions in Zurich might offer a more important explanation.The situation was similar in most of the other major financial centers 7/30/63 -4-on the Continent. There had been no further deliberate tightening ofthese markets, except in Belgium following the discount rate increasein that country, but for several months there had been a gradualtightening up in these markets and the effects were now beginning tobe seen. It probably would not be possible to get the maximum bene-fits from short-term rate increases in this country unless the Con-tinental central banks found it possible to inject additional liquidityinto their money markets.Last week, Mr. Coombs painted out, the Swiss took a step inthat direction by releasing 150 million Swiss francs from blockedcommercial bank balances, and there was hope that the Swiss authoritiesmight release more. In Amsterdam there had been some recent easing ofthe money market, possibly assisted by central bank action, withimprovement in the dollar rate. In Germany, France, and Italy therewere no signs of any important easing. The German authorities, however,were cognizant of the problem faced by this country in trying to improveits position in terms of interest rate differentials, and the GermanFederal Bank might make some concessions in the way of easing. If itwere possible to obtain some easing in the Continental money centers,this should have the effect of relieving some of the upward pressureon Euro-dollar rates and narrowing the spread between short-term ratesin New York and Euro-dollar quotations. However, if the interest 7/30/63 -5-equalization tax should curtail the flow of money to Europe and Japan,there might be a shifting of the demand for medium and long-term moneyinto the short-term market.Mr. Coombs noted a slight increase in the British bill rateand a narrowing of the discount on forward sterling. As to Canada,the major gyrations occasioned by announcement of the proposed interestequalization tax had changed into a situation where latest reportssuggested that the Canadian bill rate might be settling at a levelaround the U. S. bill rate.In reply to a question with regard to the rationale of Systemand Treasury operations related to the Swiss franc, Mr. Coombs commentedthat the hope was to see some easing of the Swiss money market. Thiscould be brought about if the Swiss commercial banks repatriated funds,but this would result in dollar accumulations by the Swiss NationalBank. If the Swiss National Bank should add further to the liquidityof the market, that would be the preferable solution. The officialsof the National Bank realized this problem and wanted to be helpful,but they were concerned, of course, about the risk of easing too muchand inciting inflationary pressures.There followed comments by Mr. Coombs in response to questionswith regard to the prospective effect of the interest equalization taxon Japan. Mr. Coombs also commented on the prospective effects of theproposed tax generally and summarized by expressing the view that it 7/30/63 -6-might add up to a virtual freeze on American investments in foreignsecurities for some time to come. The impact had already been severein certain instances.Mr. Hayes said the New York Reserve Bank had been told by anumber of New York bankers that applications for foreign term loanswere tending to burgeon. The bankers appeared somewhat puzzled asto what their approach should be. If official pronouncements weretaken at face value, bank loans were specifically exempted; Admini-stration spokesmen had indicated that bank loans should be coveredby general monetary policy. Mr. Hayes said he had been referringsuch inquiries to the Treasury.Mr. Coombs added that for the past couple of years personshad been coming into the New York Reserve Bank and inquiring, apparentlyout of a sense of real concern, whether they should hold back onforeign lending. Until the announcement of the present balance ofpayments measures, the standard line of the Government had been thatthere was no policy of restraint. However, now that the Governmenthad takea a stand, a backing away might be seen in view of the clear-cut Government attitude.After further discussion, Chairman Martin expressed the viewthat inquiries of the kind mentioned by Messrs. Hayes and Coombs shouldhe referred to the Treasury. System spokesmen should not take it uponthemselves to define Government policy in this area. 7/30/63Thereupon, upon motion duly made andseconded, and by unanimous vote, the SystemOpen Market Account transactions in foreigncurrencies during the pericd July 9-29, 1963,were approved, ratified, and confirmed.Mr. Coombs noted that a $25 million drawing under the swaparrangement with the German Federal Bank would mature August 20, 1963,and that another $25 million drawing would mature August 26. Herecommended renewal in each case.The proposed renewals, as recommended byMr. Coombs, were noted without objection.Mr. Coombs added, in this connection, that before the secondmaturity dates were reached consideration should be given to how thedrawings might be unwound. It was possible that the German FederalBank would accept an issue of medium-term Treasury bonds denominatedin German marks. Unless in the meantime there was some shift infavor of the dollar against the mark, it might be worthwhile to con-sider such a procedure.This concluded the discussion of System foreign currency opera-tions and related matters.Before this meeting there had been distributed to the membersof the Committee a report covering open market operations in U. S.Government securities and bankers' acceptances for the period July 9through July 24, 1963, and a supplementary report covering the periodJuly 25 through July 29, 1963. Copies of these reports have beenplaced in the files of the Committee. 7/30/63In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Stone commentedas follows:In the ten days or so preceding the last meeting of theCommittee we had a classic case of the powerful role playedby short- term expectations in shaping day-to-day marketbehavior. Largely in anticipation of a discount rate rise,which had been widely discussed in the financial press andbroadly hinted at in official statements, Treasury bill rateshad risen by close to 1/4 percentage point and bond yieldshad also moved higher. In the past three weeks, on the otherhand, duing which the widely expected discount rate riseactually occurred, the market has been subjected to a combina-tion of influences that tended to restrain any further rise inyields and in some sectors has pulled yields lower than theywere before the discount rate increase took effect.In the case of Treasury bills, rates are only slightlyabove where they were three weeks ago, and are somewhat belowthe level touched the day after the discount rate increasewas announced. There seem to have been two major, and relatedreasons for the recent performance of the bill market. First,dealers had undertaken to reduce their positions to a very lowlevel during the period that a discount rate increase waswidely expected. On July 15, for example (just a day beforethe rate increase was announced), 7 out of the 20 dealersshowed, in their trading accounts, short positions rangingup to $50 million in bills up to three months; three otherdealers showed a net position of zero; and six others showedlong positions of less than $20 million. At the same timethat dealers were trimming their holdings to these low levels,investors were withholding commitments waiting for the air toclear. The air cleared with the announcement of the discountrate change on July 16, effective July 17, and the accumulatedfunds that had been held off the market came rushing in tocapture the bill rates that emerged immediately following thediscount rate change. That demand encountered the kind ofdealer positions I have just outlined--and of course therate went down.The second major factor in the bill market, and one thatreinforced the influence of the first, was the very easy con-dition of the central money market, which became particularlyconspicuous toward the close of the country bank settlementperiod ended July 24. In turn, that easy money market was aproduct of the heavy borrowings in the early part of the week,-8 - 7/30/63and particularly the sharp reduction in the basic reservedeficiency of the major New York City banks. Indeed, theirbasic deficiency declined from an average of $862 milliontwo weeks ago to only $81 million last week--and theirdemand for Federal funds declined accordingly.These factors that have tended to pull bill rates lowerwould seem to be largely temporary, but it is not possibleto say how long it will take to cvercome their influence.It might take only a few days--with yesterday's moderaterise in bill rates perhaps the first step in a move to asomewhat higher range of variation. Or the other hand, itmight take considerably longer, perhaps as long as a month,for the recent influences to be worked out.Apart from whatever decision on policy the Committee maymake today, it seems to me that there are three factors likelyto be of major importance in determining whether bill ratescarry through yesterday's rise and move into somewhat higherground:1. A further firming of the money market--which willdepend largely on whether the New York banks return to theirusual sizable basic deficit position, and thus once again bemajor bidders for Federal funds. As a firming of the moneymarket occurs, it should increase dealers' financing costsand perhaps induce some commercial bank selling of bills.2. The second factor is the course of nonbank demandfor bills. Some abatement of this demand might come abouteither because more attractive investment alternatives areavailable (for example, in certificates of deposit at thenew rate levels) or because of some working down of corpo-rate liquidity, particularly in the automobile industry inthe next month or so. However, it is very hard to estimatehow nonbank demand for bills will develop.3. The third factor is a Treasury offering of a stripof bills. We understand that the Treasury is prepared tooffer a strip of about $800 million of Treasury bills atany time with a view to bolstering the short rate structure.This is a useful backstop to current efforts to stiffenshort rates, but if possible it might be preferable towait until dealer positions have been restored somewhat,in order to achieve maximum rate impact from the stripoffering. Indeed, there is no assurance that a billstrip offering will succeed in raising rates more thanvery temporarily if the money market does not firm or ifnonbank demand for bills should be strong. 7/30/63If the recent period has taught us nothing else, it hasdemonstrated beyond question that the inter-relationshipsamong bill rates, Federal funds rates, dealer positions andattitudes, and reserve management of various groups of banksare highly complex. The money market has been feeling itsway along in a somewhat changed environment, and in conductingopen market operations we too have had to feel our own wayalong through the same set of changing relationships. Itappears that in the current statement week some measure offirmness in the money market has been regained. In meetingthis week's reserve needs we have sought to stay a step ortwo behind the reflection of those needs in the market inorder to avoid pushing the market off the delicate balancein which it is poised and sending it back toward the exces-sively easy conditions that prevailed recently. But thebasic reserve position of the New York banks has remainedunusually comfortable, and dealer positions have remainedunusually light--and until these parts of the picture areback in their normal places it is rather difficult to havemuch confidence in the maintenance of a firm money market.The performance of the Treasury note and bond marketsince the discount rate increase has also been somewhat outof the ordinary--in that prices of notes and bonds havetended to move higher. In this case, the market has givena good deal of attention to the various statements byAdministration officials to the general effect thatvigorous efforts would be made by the nation's financialauthorities to avoid higher domestic long-term interestrates. While there has apparently beer only moderateinvestor buying of intermediate and longer issues, dealershave made considerable efforts to cover short positionsand have put prices up in the process. Another upwardprice influence during the recent period emerged from thefact that the Treasury confined its August refunding maturityto a single short-term issue--offering a new 3-3/4 per centnote to mature in November 1964. The subscription booksare still open on this exchange offering today and tomorrow,and all reports indicate a smooth and successful operation.Indeed, with public holdings of rights amounting to only$2.5 billion, the operation appears to be generating onlya moderate volume of market activity.Still another strengthening influence on the bond markethas been the prospective reinvestment demand from a $197million advance refunding planned for today by the GrantCounty Public Utility District of Washington. The District,which has built the Wanapum Dam, plans to offer these-10- 7/30/63tax-exempt bonds today in order to refund an issue that iscallable in 1970. In the meantime, they propose to investthe proceeds of the current offering in Treasury bonds,mainly the 4's of August 1970--which will more than coverthe prospective interest cost of their new issue--and thishas already been placing some upward pressure on that andsurrounding issues.Given these various upward price influences in the mar-ket for notes and bonds, the System's job of providing re-serves for next week is further complicated, for recentofferings of coupon issues to the Desk generally have beenfew in number, small in size, and typically priced to thefull offered side of the market--providing little opportunityto inject reserves through purchases in this maturity areawithout pushing prices to unsustainable levels.I would like to add, with respect to the current Treasuryoffering, that the System holds $4,075 million of maturingrights and we plan to exchange this entire holding for thenew 3-3/4 per cent notes.Finally, it seems to me that the temporary reasons forwhich the Committee enlarged the System Account's leewayfor net purchases and sales between meetings to $1.5 billionhave now passed. Accordingly, the Counittee may wish toreturn the leeway to the old figure of $1 billion.In discussion, Mr. Mills notes that the Manager had indicatedsome lack of confidence in the maintenance of a strong rate structurein the short-term Government securities market. However, with Federalfunds trading at 3-1/2 per cent and the rate to Government securitiesdealers by New York City banks running as high as 3-3/4 per cent, pre-sumably the dealers had an unfavorable carry on their inventories.Presumably, also, banks that adjusted their positions through theFederal funds market would find the cost excessive to attempt tocontinue their positions in lower-yielding Government securities.Granted the need for bringing market rates into alignment with the-11- 7/30/63 -12-discount rate, he asked the Manager how much offsetting influence thelatter estimated from the dealers' unsatisfactory carrying position andthe Federal funds rate.Mr. Stone replied that if the Federal funds rate could be main-tained rather consistently at 3-1/2 per cent, that would exert an upwardpull on all short-term rates.. The question was whether a 3-1/2 per centFederal funds rate could be maintained at a time when the basic reservepositions of the New York City banks were as comfortable as they were,and dealer positions as low as they were. If dealer positions shouldrise, a significant part of the increase in such positions would befinanced at the New York City banks, which would increase the demandfor Federal funds. In effect, New York City banks would be drawingfunds from around the country at 3-1/2 per cent and lending to dealersat 3-3/4 or 3-7/8 per cent. Before this process could take place, how-ever, the New York City banks must have a strong incentive to obtainfunds. Until that occurred, he found it difficult to have confidencein the maintenance of the Federal funds rate at the discount rate.Mr. Hickman observed that this reasoning did not take accourtof the possibility of the Committee allowing net free reserves to fallto zero or lower, which would cause the banks at some point to divestbills. 7/30/63 -13-Mr. Stone replied that he had not wanted to anticipate whataction the Committee might take today. Instead, he had attempted tospell out some of the factors for the Committee's evaluation.Mr. Deming asked whether, if the Treasury decided to under-take a monthly auction of one-year bills, the Manager would foreseeany serious problem from the standpoint of freedom of System policy.Mr. Stone replied that after the first three or four monthlyauctions, such auctions probably would become about as routine asthe current weekly auctions of shorter bills. He anticipated thatthe market would acquire the one-year bills in the auctions anddistribute them quite promptly--within three or four days--and thatthe monthly auctions would impose little or no restraint on Systempolicy.Thereupon, upon motion duly made andseconded, and by unanimous vote, the openmarket transactions in Government securi-ties and bankers' acceptances during theperiod July 9 through July 29, 1963, wereapproved, ratified, and confirmed.The Chairman then called for the usual staff economic andfinancial reports beginning with Mr. Noyes, who presented the follow-ing statement on economic developments:As was reported during the period, the economy advancedconsiderably in the second quarter--and, as was also repeatedlypointed out, some of the gain was at the expense of subsequentactivity. 7/30/63The most spectacular increase was in industrial pro-duction, which spurted from 121 in March to 125 in June.Total GNP was up an estimated $7.2 billion annual rate,with inventory accumulation contributing less than it hadin the preceding quarter. Thus, final purchases increasedmore--about $9 billion. But less than $1 billion of thisgain was in consumer purchases of goods, and the relativelyweak performance of retail sales which again was noted asthe quarter progressed, muted the optimism that the over-all performance might have seemed to justify.We are now just in the middle of the so-called summerdoldrums, and current indications are for considerably lessexpansion in the production index and GNP in the currentquarter than in the one just past. The rate of unemployment,to be released later this week, will probably be unchangedfrom June to July. The greatest likelihood is that theJuly production index will hold at 125 rather than rise orfall. As was widely noted, new orders dropped in June, notonly for steel, where a sharp drop was anticipated, but fora wide range of durable goods. Housing starts in June werealso off from the unexpectedly high levels of the latespring, suggesting that we may see some leveling out in thespurt in construction activity that has been going on inrecent months.On the other hand, retail sales, especially at depart-ment stores, have shown signs of picking up. In fact, eventhe auto market seems to have regained momentum in the first20 days of July. Characterizing the situation, as one Wash-ington letter did, as a "near buying spree" is too strong,but there is some very welcome improvement.The 4/10 of 1 per cent increase in consumer prices inJune was rather sharp for that sluggish index, but the in-crease was selective and not of a sort that appears to becon agious. Wholesale commodity prices remained littlechanged.By and large, developments in the domestic economy havenot varied much from the anticipated pattern. Some weakening,at least in the pace of advance, was almost inevitable aftermid-year, and what we have seen thus far is well within therange that should have been expected.The current attitudes and expectations of the businesscommunity appear to be mixed. Certainly, the President'sbalance of payments message did not bolster confidence inthe dollar as much as one might have hoped. Second quarterprofits ranged from good to terrific--but they have notexcited buying interest in the stock market. Demonstrations-14- 7/30/63for civil rights have unquestionably aided to business uncer-tainty in some areas, as has the situation in the railroadindustry.It is very doubtful that sentiment as to the future willcrystallize in the weeks immediately ahead. Some further side-ways movement, with mixed components, is generally expected andvery likely to be realized. Beyond that, as we move throughSeptember, observers differ as to what is most likely, butthey would all agree that some further strength in consumerbuying is essential if we are to avoid serious doubts as tothe sustainability of recent rates of expansion, much lessthe possibility of further increases.As I suggested six weeks ago, from a purely domesticpoint of view, this summer would be a good time--quite apartfrom any significant change in policy--to let some of theease stemming from moderation of expansionary forces andless optimistic appraisals of the outlook reflect itselfin credit markets. Whether this is possible, in the lightof our balance of payments problem, is another question.Mr. Holland presented the following statement on financial develop-ments:The financial system is undergoing a progressive adjust-ment to the variety of official actions and statements thathave been packed into the past two weeks. Here in the UnitedStates, the adjustments in most cases appear mild to date--partly because of anticipatory market movements earlier. Inthe shortest and longest term markets for funds, adjustmentshave carried far enough to provide a reasonable outline oftheir portents for the near future. In the bill market andthe banking system, however--both key sectors for policy-making purposes--developments of recent weeks have beenenigmatic. In these areas, a proper appraisal of thelikely trend of events under the current policy environmentprobably has to await further clarifying developments.Mr. Stone has outlined the whipsawing in bank reservepositions and the Federal funds market during the weekssurrounding the discount rate change. But with all ReserveBank discount rates at 3-1/2 per cent in the current state-ment week, these distortions seem to be working out, and theFederal funds rate has moved into a more logical relationshipto the new discount rate. So long as the free reserve targetis low enough to involve a significant volume of large bank-15- 7/30/63borrowing, the Federal funds rate ought to be expected torange most of the time in close proximity to the discountrate. From my own observations, I would guess that freereserves in the range of $100-$200 million and a Federalfunds rate ranging from 3-1/4 to 3-1/2 per cent would bebroadly consistent at this juncture.The bill market is a different matter. Investor de-mand has been strong this past month, blotting up more thana billion dollars of net sales of bills by dealers and NewYork City banks. Bill rates, meanwhile, have oscillated ina 3.18-3.27 per cent range following their upward adjustmentto Secretary Dillon's testimony on July 8. But I doubt theyworld have held this high in the absence of market anticipa-tion of higher rates to come, for the rate advances havecentered around official statements or actions with rateimplication, with intervening downward drifts of quotationsas investor buying reduced available supplies. Indeed, thewillingness of dealers and leading banks to sell off theirown bill holdings in these circumstances was partly relatedto expectations of higher rates later.Nonbank demand for bills may continue strong over thenext few weeks, and there is a possibility it could over-ride the expectational forces now in the market, unless theyare reinforced by policy action. Such reinforcement couldcome by issuance of a bill strip; as has been noted, theTreasury is ready to do this on short notice within the nexttwo weeks even though it does not need the cash. The rein-forcement could also come from greater System efforts tosupply reserves by purchases of coupon issues, with orwithout offsetting sales of bills. Each of these measureshas its disadvantages, but the current public policy dialoguewould seem to call for some consideration of both beforeresort is had to the third alternative for resisting anyundesired rate declines, namely, a further general reductionin the level of reserve availability.There is a potential market development that could sparethe Federal Reserve this need to chose among objectives. Thatis a substantial expansion of sales of time certificates ofdeposit by banks and dealers to customers as an alternativeto investment in Treasury bills. If banks take full advantageof the liberalization of Regulation Q in the issuance ofcertificates of deposit, they may divert a significant amountof money that would otherwise push into the bill market directly.In fact, there was an increase in other time deposits of city-16- 7/30/63banks it early July, and there was a sharply concentrated$145 million run-up at New York City banks in late July.But this latter pace almost certainly cannot be continued;in particular, New York City banks are posting negotiablecertificates of deposit rates that are at the lower end ofthe effective scale of competition for short-term funds.Despite their success in attracting more certificatesof deposit money, city banks reported a substantial netshrinkage in credit and deposits during the first threeweeks of July. For the most part, this stemmed from alarger than seasonal drop in U.S. Government securitiesholdings on the asset side and in Government deposits onthe liability side. This followed on the heels of a largeJune increase in both items; it reflected largely thetiming of Treasury financing, although perhaps also someresponse to the less easy prevailing reserve positionsduring the month. Securities loans and loans to financialinstitutions at leading banks also were lower. But commer-cial loans tended to show no more than the usual July down-drift; and real estate and consumer loans continued tomount, with only a slightly abated pace. Meanwhile, banksoutside the leading cities were continuing to demonstrateabout the same seasonally adjusted credit rise as earlierthis year. One consequence of all these banking changeswas to confine the net deposit shrinkage of the bankingsystem primarily to the Government area. Reserves againstprivate deposits have averaged about $80-$100 million abovethe Board guideline during July. Thus far in July, moneysupply has been running about $900 million higher than thelast half of June, with time deposits also continuing toclimb briskly. Additional net Government deposit pay-outsscheduled during the first half of August should bolsterthe money supply even further in the weeks ahead. Thusthe private liquidity in the economy has built in a certaindegree of cushioning against bank credit contraction in thecurrent monetary climate.Long-term credit markets have been behaving as if theyexpected to suffer no adverse consequences from the combina-tion of recent and prospective official actions on thebalance cf payments front. Yields on domestic issues havebeen stable to buoyant, and the flow of investible funds isunabated. This may reflect partly solid confidence inrepeated official statements that no upward pressure onlong rates is desired, and partly a market consensus thatthe higher discount rate will not trigger any important net-17- 7/30/63reduction in bank lending to long-term borrowers. Were banksto reduce in any important degree their more than one-billiondollars-a-month of net acquisitions of real estate, municipal,and agency obligations, the capital markets would certainlybe affected adversely. But the current rate stability inthese markets suggests that no such prospect is foreseen.For the time being at least, higher rates in some short-termareas without higher long-term rates are an accomplished fact.What remains to be seen more clearly is whether billrates can hold at something like their present level fromnow until the onset of seasonally firming pressures in thefall, and whether the banking system can maintain an appro-priate rate of expansion without being hampered by the one-half per cent higher cost of the marginal borrowings madenecessary by the prevailing level of free reserves. Onthese points, I judge the develoments to date to be incon-clusive. We can be reasonably sure, I think, that the newcombination of a discount rate of 3-1/2 per cent, freereserves in the range of $100-$200 million, and a Federalfunds rate around 3-1/4 to 3-1/2 per cent can be fairlyconsistently maintained. But to be clear as to the furthercousequences of such a combination, we need to maintain ita little longer. This also, I think, fills the prescriptionfor an "even keel" policy, which would seem to be in orderin any event through the first part of the next three weeksin view of the Treasury refunding now under way.In relay to a question, Mr. Holland noted that the larger bankshad divested a substantial amount of U. S. Government securities duringthe month of July, whereas there had been a large increase in holdingsof such securities in the month of June. At country banks there mayhave been some divestment of Government securities in July, butapparently to no substantial extent.Mr. Hersey presented the following statement with respect to theU. S. balance of payments:-18- 7/30/63The initial effects of the System's raising of discountrates and Regulation Q ceilings on July 17 and of the announce-ment on July 18 of the proposed interest equalization tax havenot been clearly favorable for the U. S. balance of paymentsoutlook. The evidence is of course very scanty, and it ismuch too early to draw conclusions yet.The tax proposal and the subsequent exemption for Canadadid have a net effect in the exchange markets of strengthen-ing the U. S. dollar somewhat against the Canadian dollar,after a rather sharp impact at the first announcement. Also,as a result of the discussions with Canadian officials, andassuming that the Canadian current account balance of pay-ments does not deteriorate so as to justify additionalborrowings, we can now be reasonably confident that thebulge in the U. S. outflow for new Canadian security issueswill in fact taper off in coming months, as we had previouslyhoped it would. In the first half of this year this outflowexceeded $600 million. In the years 1956 to 1959, theaverage flow to Canada had been less than $200 million perhalf-year, before it declined to a still lower rate in 1960,1961, and the first three quearters of 1962. Thus, in annualrate terms, the outflow on new Canadian issues in the firsthalf of this year was worsening our balance of payments, ascompared with the 1956-to-1959 period, by twice the differ-ence of these two figures, i.e., by nearly $0,9 billionannual rate. We can now look forward to some diminutionof this flow. What actions the Canadian authorities maytake to enforce a reduction in borrowings from the UnitedStates, or how quickly any such actions may have theireffect, are not at all clear.The tax proposal, if enacted, will cut off and reduceto zero any growth that might have developed in Europeanissues in our capital market. It should help to demonstrateto the Europeans the importance we attach, in the long run,to a satisfactory development of their own capital markets.In the first half of 1963, the outflow to Europe on newissues, net of foreign participation, was about $100 million,not quite as large as it had been in the correspondingperiod a year earlier. Also, new issues by Japaneseborrowers (which were over $100 million in the first sixmonths of this year), and by governments and companies inother industrially developed countries, will be curtailed.But we may find that reductions of outflow to some of thesecountries through this channel will be offset by increasedbank lending, or by growth of the outflow on new issues toexempted countries, such as Mexico.-19- 7/30/63The discount rate and time deposit ceiling increases, orrather the advances that developed in the first half of Julyin market rates on U. S. Treasury bills and on negotiable timecertificates of deposit, which have been, so to speak, rati--fied by the Federal Reserve actions, have had little or noeffect on covered interest differentials vis-a-vis the Euro-dollar market. Willingness of the Japanese authorities toallow higher rates to be paid if necessary for Euro-dollarfunds was one of the factors in the rise of Euro-dollarrates.Other effects that might have been hoped for from theFederal Reserve and Administration actions, in terms ofstrengthening confidence in the dollar and diminishing out-flows of funds motivated by the psychclogical climate, arenot evident as of now. Critical reactions to the tax pro-posal are appearing in the European press. There has beenlittle or no general improvement for the dollar in exchangemarkets, apart from the Canadian. And the first tentativeindications of the over-all balance of payments in the weekending last Wednesday suggested that the deficit was runningat a very high rate.Before trying to evaluate this last piece of evidence,it may be useful to look briefly at the balance of paymentsin the second quarter of this year. The initial estimategiven to the Committee three weeks ago has had to be revisedsharply in the light of more or less final figures of reservesand related liabilities for June. The second-quarter deficit,seasonally adjusted, and before countig receipts from specialgovernment transactions, is now estimated at about $1-1/4billion, almost as large as in the fourth quarter of lastyear, and considerably larger than the gross deficit in thefirst quarter of this year. It is now quite clear that theworsening by $300 or $400 million between the first andsecond quarters can be fully explained, and more, by arise in bank lending to foreigners, even without takingaccount of other outflows of short-term capital recordedor unrecorded.Bank-reported claims on foreigners, short-term andmedium-term, rose in April, May, and June by $650 million,in contrast to a reduction of somewhat under $100 millionin the first quarter. Bank-reported claims do include someforeign currency deposits and some investments in foreignmoney market assets for account of U. S. customers. Butchanges reported for April and May in these elements weresmall, and it appears that the bulk of the outflow in those-20- 7/30/63mouths was in acceptance credits, collections outstanding,and bank loans. Flows of these kinds are responsive totrade developments and to borrowers' needs or desires, andthey are not easily influenced by small changes in U. S.money market rates. The drop in outflows of bank-reportedclaims denominated in dollars from about $1.3 billion in1961 to about $450 million in 1962 can not be ascribed inany significant part to interest rate changes. Nor can thislatest rise in outflows--which makes the rate for the firsthalf year almost as high as the 1961 outflow, and the ratefor the second quarter by itself much higher. The onlymoral to be drawn from this is that we need a much strongerbalance on trade and other accounts, to allow us to takethis sort of variation in the flow of bank lending in ourstride.In conclusion, I would like to go back to the tentativeweekly indications of the gross deficit in recent weeks, andsound an agnostic note. These indicators show, for the threeweeks ending last Wednesday, an average weekly gross deficitof over $150 million, with increases in the amount from weekto week. These are very large figures, implying a monthlyrate of deficit of over $600 million. However, it would bewrong to jump to a conclusion that these latest figuresnecessarily indicate any real worsening in any part of thebalance of payments--trade, aid, or capital--as comparedwith the second quarter. This is because we are now in theseason of heavy tourist expenditures abroad, and at a timeof year when exports drop off seasonally more than importsdo, and more than Government aid and imports combined.These factors, offset to a small extent by other seasonalfactors that work the other way, tend to increase theaverage monthly deficit in the third quarter, as comparedwith the second quarter, by about $150 million. July isparticularly strongly affected. Thus even a deficit of$600 million in July, unadjusted, might represent littleor no further net worsening from the second-quarter averageunadjusted gross deficit of a little under $400 million.It is not yet demonstrated that the very bad figures ofMay and June have grown even worse in July.The Chairmar then called for the go-around of comments and viewson economic conditions and monetary policy. He turned first to Mr. Hayes,who presented the following statement:-21- 7/30/63While the business picture has shown no significantchange since the last meeting, with a continued slow ad-vance to be expected, there are perhaps more uncertaintiesin the near-term outlook than there have been in the pastcouple of months. There are some slight doubts about thestrength of the prospects for capital spending and housing,which have been counted on to provide an offset to steelinventory liquidation; and Government outlays seem to beleveling off. The general outlook has been clouded byseveral uncertainties that have come to the fore recentlyand that have undoubtedly contributed to the downwardtrend of the stock market. The apparent inability of theCongress to cope effectively with the growing mass oflegislative proposals before it, including income taxlegislation, is itself a major inpedimnt to a vigorousbusiness advance. The stock market may be said to havebehaved reasonably well in the face of such events as theSEC report, the rise in discount rates, the President'sinterest equalization tax proposal, and the threatenedrail strike.Bank credit declined in the first three weeks of Julyprimarily as a reflection of the June Treasury financing;but the somewhat slower growth of credit in recent monthswas of course quite consistent with the Committee's policyactions. There is a continuing absence of strength inbusiness loan demand. Nonbank liquidity in general remainsample, and the banks' position is still comfortable. Thetimely raising of the interest rate ceilings under Regula-tion Q has already given a new lease of life to the volumeof certificates of deposit outstanding.I might note in passing that the Treasury's financingproblems now look much less burdensome than seemed likelysix months ago. The cash deficit was only about $4 billionin fiscal 1963 and is now projected at only about $7 billionfor fiscal 1964 after allowing for the effects of the pro-posed tax reduction bill. There is much less ground thanthere might have been earlier for opposition to the taxbill because of doubts as to the possibility of the result-ing deficit being soundly financed; and certainly the taxcut is needed more than ever as a means of relieving mone-tary policy of some of its burden of encouraging domesticexpansion.As for the balance of payments, the latest indicatorsshow continued large increases in foreign dollar holdings.The very heavy June deficit included several special items,including sizable mid-year window-dressing operations; but-22- 7/30/63unfortunately, whereas a reversal of this item in earlyJuly might have been looked for, the deficit figures forthe first few weeks of July continued unsatisfactorilyhigh. Our discount rate increase was well receivedabroad and seemed for a day or two to be having usefulresults in the exchanges. Very soon thereafter, however,this whole tendency was completely obscured by the emer-gence of grave uncertainties abroad resulting from theinterest equalization tax proposal, as well as from thesubsequent impression of hasty preparation created by thedemonstrated need for prompt amedments to the proposal.I have had and still have serious doubts about the wisdomof this proposal, and these doubts were conveyed to theTreasury while the proposal was in the planning stage.While the tax, or even the proposal thereof, will doubt-less have a substantial inhibiting effect on foreign bondofferings, it is too soon to tell whether this result willbe offset, or perhaps overshadowed, by adverse side effectson inter-national capital flows--either in the form of adiversion of the flow to direct invesnent or bank loansor in the form of a capital flight induced by fears thatthis tax move may be the forerunner of ultimate exchangecontrols. Such fears have been expressed in financialmarkets abroad to an increasing degree in the last weekor so, ard this in turn has found reflection in the deli-cately blanced position of the dollar in European exchangemarkets.My hope would be that after the dust has settled ourdiscount rate action, and the accompanying move on Regula-tion Q, will have gained us considerable benefits in theway of a diminished drain of short-term capital flows.But the discount rate action can be really effective onlyif it is translated into a satisfactory firming of short-term market rates--especially the 90-day bill rate. Thediscount rate action could of course be easily construedas an empty gesture if market rates were to fail to achieveand maintain a healthy increase over levels prevailing priorto the discount rate rise. In view of the state of theexchange markets, and the uncertain and possibly perverseeffects of the interest equalization tax proposal, I thinkit is doubly important that we convey through our policyactions an impression of decisive effort to sustain foreignconfidence in the dollar.Thus, despite the fact that the domestic outlook is noteverything we could wish, I believe open market policy shouldbe directed, as soon as the books are closed tomorrow on the-23- 7/30/63new Treasury issue, to the primary objective of achieving afirmer short-term market rate structure to support the newdiscount rate level. Incidentally, I have been assured bythe Treasury that after Wednesday we need not feel any "evenkeel" restraint in working toward such a rate level, in viewof the short maturity of their offering and their avowedintention of pressing for firmer short-term rates. I amthinking of a 90-day bill rate somewhere around 3-3/8 percent or higher, a Federal funds rate consistently at 3-1/2per cent, and whatever level of free reserves may be con-sistent with these aims. My guess would be that they couldprobably be achieved without dropping free reserves consis-tently to the zero level; and if free reserves can be keptnear their recent level, so much the better. It goes with-out saying, in view of the importance of our rate objective,that we should make as much use as may be feasible of inter-mediate and long-term purchases, as well as swaps. Whilenatural factors are likely to continue to exert downwardpressure on long-term rates in any case, we need feel noreluctance if some of our operations produce side benefitsin the way of a cushioning of the impact of the discountrate rise on long-term rate levels.I would like to make one side comment on the open mar-ket tools that we have at our disposal. For a long timenow some of the Committee's staff have had in mind thequestion whether reverse repurchase agreements might servea very useful purpose on occasions when we wished to effecta temporary absorption of reserves to prevent unduly sloppymoney market conditions. We make frequent use of repurchaseagreements to deal with temporary tightness, but we have nocomparable technique readily available at present to dealwith temporary sloppiness. The experience of last weekaffords an excellent example of a situation in which thisadded tool in his kit might have been extremely useful tothe Manager of the Account in his efforts to carry out theCommittee s policy directive under an unusual set of circum-stances. I hope that the Committee will be willing to askthe staff to give this possibility intensive study in thenear future.It seems to me, now that the whole System has movedfrom a 3 per cent to a 3-1/2 per cent discount rate, thatit would be quite appropriate to effect a rather generalrewording of the first paragraph of the current policydirective, even though many of the factors mentioned inthe existing directive are still very much in our minds;and I would also make a small change in the second para-graph to indicate the need for slightly greater firmnessin the money market.-24- 7/30/63 -25-Mr. Ellis commented on developments in the First District,noting in his remarks that the response in New England to the nationaleconomic uptrend continued to be less than satisfactory. With respectto nonagricultural employment, the June rate was virtually the same asthat for January 1963. Only five groups of manufacturing industrieswere above year-ago levels in terms of employment. Manufacturing out-put had remained almost level throughout the first half of the yearand showed only a 1.3 per cent increase above a year ago. Shoe pro-duction for the first half of this year was about 5 per cent belowthe level of a year ago, but expectations in this industry for thesecond half were improved. The output performance, combined withstrength in the construction industry, retail spending, and Govern-ment spending had been sufficient to stimulate credit demands. Loanfigures from weekly reporting banks showed expansion. Bank loanexpansion thus far this year had exceeded any recent year, withyear-to-year gains in all categories except agriculture and loansto purchase or carry securities.Mr. Ellis then turned to the recent action of the Comptrollerof the Currency in removing buying and selling limitations on Federalfunds. Two of the largest banks in the District had called at thediscount window last week, but when informed that the Federal fundslimitations had been lifted, satisfied their needs in that area. Inthe week of July 21, District banks were net purchasers of Federal 7/30/63 -26-funds at a rate unmatched since December 1962. Judging from thisexperience, Mr. Ellis thought that borrowings at the discount windowcould be expected to be somewhat lower. The Comptroller's actionseemed also to raise certain related questions; namely, how bankswould report Federal funds transactions in their call reports andthe relationship between national and State-chartered banks. Onelarge Massachusetts State-chartered bank reportedly had been advisedto operate on the same basis as if it were a national bank, but inConnecticut legislative action would be required to remove a limita-tion on the selling side.Turning to monetary policy, Mr. Ellis noted that the effectof recent System actions was difficult to appraise in light of theother factors that had exerted an effect on the market, includingthe President's balance of payments message, the System's actionin raising the discount rate, the Comptroller's Federal funds action,and the Treasury's debt management activities. In any event, however,market rates had just about held their own since the discount rateannouncement. The unresolved question was how much, if any, actionon reserve availability would be desirable in support of the discountrate action.His own conclusion, Mr. Ellis said, was that there was some-thing to be said for getting as much positive value as possible outof the discount rate increase, in terms of the effect of rate relation-ships on short-term capital outflow. However, the market should be 7/30/63 -27-given some time to adjust before any further substantial policy moveswere made, particularly on reserve availability. For the periodimmediately ahead, therefore, he would think, for target purposes,in terms of a three-month bill rate of approximately 3-3/8 per cent,with Federal funds frequently at 3-1/2 per cent. Free reserves mightbe in the general area of $100 million, with any doubts resolved onthe side of firmness. Some decline in borrowing might be expected ifmore reserve needs were met through the Federal funds market as aresult of the Comptroller's ruling. He had not thought previouslyabout the possibility of the use of reverse repurchase agreements,as mentioned by Mr. Hayes, for dealing with certain kinds of marketsituations, but he would urge that this possibility be studied further.As to the directive, Mr. Ellis said he felt the Committeecould get along with the present statement. However, he was con-cerned about the tendency to keep the directive in a standard formfor rather long periods of time and to make only slight changes inwording. He would like to see a reworded version of the first para-graph, and possibly the second paragraph.Mr. Irons stated that in the Eleventh District most of themajor activity indexes showed continued advance during June, and oninto July. The industrial production index rose another point,largely due to an increase in durable goods. Nonagriculturalemployment continued its gradual upward trend, and the crude oil 7/30/63 -28-situation showed advances in producticn and refining over year-agolevels. Construction in the District was at. an all-time recordlevel--better than 10 per cent above the same period last year forthe first five months--and 21 per cent up for the most recent month.Department store sales were up about 8 per cent in July over year-agolevels and about 4 per cent for the year to date. The situation ingeneral, Mr. Irons noted, was favorable--with no surge of activitybut a steady, moderate increase. Agriculture in the District wasclosely affected by weather conditions and was difficult to appraise.However, the major crops looked quite good at this juncture.As to financial developments in the District, Mr. Irons notedthat loans and deposits were off a bit during the past three weeks,with a moderate increase in investments. The decline in depositswas almost entirely attributable to a corresponding decline inGovernment deposits. Federal funds activity in the Eleventh Districthad not yet, apparently, shown the effect of the Comptroller's rulingmentioned by Mr. Ellis. Average purchases had been exceeding sales,and borrowing from the Reserve Bank had moved up somewhat.Mr. Irons observed that the problem presented for creditpolicy seemed most difficult. The System apparently was expectedto nudge short-term rates up, minimize any increase in long-termrates, and at the same time maintain reserve availability and avoidincreased firmness in the market. For the moment, Mr. Irons said,he would not favor any aggressive action by the Committee that would 7/30/63 -29-further complicate the whole market situation. Instead, the Committeeshould "feel its way along," moving in a manner consistent with itsobjectives and hoping that market forces would work in such a manneras to help make the new discount rate an effective rate. He felt thata bill rate of 3.25 or 3.30 per cent would be in the right direction,but he would not advocate deliberately pushing the rate higher withthe market in its present state. He would like to see the Federalfunds rate at 3-1/4 or 3-1/2 per cent, wit free reserves possiblyaveraging somewhere around $150 million or a little less. He feltthat such a movement would be in the right direction, and about allthat could reasonably be expected in light of prevailing forces.Turning to the directive, Mr. Irons said he, like Mr. Ellis,felt that the directive should be changed at some point to take intoaccount what had transpired during the past few weeks. In his opinion,an entirely new directive probably would he in order in the not toodistant future. For the present, however, he would not be stronglyadverse to retaining the form of the iresent directive.Mr. Hemmings reported that in the Twelfth District businessactivity showed a modest gain in June, although the occasional brightspots were tempered by sluggish performances in some areas. In thePacific Coast States, total employment rose a little more thanseasonally, with increases in California outweighing declines inWashington and Oregon. However, the aggregate unemployment rate for 7/30/63 -30-the three States stood unchanged in June at the 5.9 per cent level ofMay. Although the current rate of unemployment was higher on the WestCoast than for the nation, the Pacific Coast had made a somewhat bettershowing on a year-to-year basis; the unemployment rate was unchanged onthe Coast from June 1962, while it rose slightly in the nation. Employ-ment in the manufacturing industries on the Pacific Coast declined forthe fifth consecutive month, largely as a result of decreases in air-craft payrolls in Washington. However, ordnance employment in Cali-fornia turned up in June for the first time since February.Housing starts in the District fell off in June after a recordmonth in May but were still well above the year-ago pace. Prices ofFHA mortgages in the secondary market had been leveling off in theDistrict. Steel production had declined in recent weeks in theDistrict, but by a lesser percentage than in the rest of the nation.The continuing lumber strike in the Pacific Northwest had strengthenedlumber prices. District farm receipts set a record for the month of May.Department store sales (seasonally adjusted) in the Districtwere down slightly in June after a sharp recovery in May. Californiacar registrations ran ahead of sales nationally in the first half ofthe year. In the Twelfth District as a whole, however, registrationsthrough May apparently did not show as much of a percentage gain overthe first five months of last year as did sales nationally. 7/30/63 -31-Total credit extended by District weekly reporting banksdeclined slightly in the first three weeks cf July, with a decreasein loans offsetting a rise in investments. Reserve city banks con-tinued to show a net borrowed reserve position, although daily averagenet sales of Federal funds increased somewhat over the preceding threeweeks.Mr. Deming said general economic activity in the Ninth Districtseemed to be roughly paralleling that of the nation. The iron oresituation seemed to be normal, that is, not very good; shipments were15 per cent less than in the same period of 1962. This decrease wasattributable to the high carry-over of inventory from 1962 and was notunexpected. With respect to the demand for credit, District banks wereexperiencing a somewhat heavier demand than the nation. There was atendency toware ar outflow of funds frcm the District, and conse-quently District banks were somewhat less liquid than had beenanticipated on the basis of estimated credit demands.With respect to policy, Mr. Deming said he agreed with theposition taken by Mr. Irons as far as the next three-week period wasconcerned. The System should move carefully, avoiding any significantlessening of reserve availability, on the one hand, and on the otheran over-abundant supply of reserves that would confuse the marketregarding System intentions about short-term rates. He did not thinksteps should be taken to push short-term rates higher at too rapid a 7/30/63 -32-pace, although he hoped market forces might work gradually in thatdirection. Longer term rates were a possible problem, and he wasalso concerned about possible limitations on the freedom of actionof the Federal Reserve System. In present circumstances, for example,the Federal Reserve was somewhat inhibited in taking actions that wouldaffect long-term rates. Likewise, he had already raised with theAccount Manager the question whether monthly auctions of one-yearbills might have some inhibiting effect. Although Treasury coopera-tion in holding up short-term rates seemed desirable, there might beanother side to the picture; namely, that this was a means wherebythe Treasury could exercise monetary policy decisions. This was allsomething the System should continue to watch closely, lest it finditself restrited in taking actions in the future.Mr. Scanlon reported that recnt evidence pointed to furthermodest business improvement in the Seventh District, and expectationsof businessmen as to the remainder of 1963 were generally optimistic.The decline in steel output appeared to be having less effect thanhad beer expected. The seasonally adjusted index of electric powerconsumption for manufacturing firms in the Detroit area reached anew high in June. Purchasing agents in Chicago reported good levelsof activity and some lessening of upward price pressures, althoughthey continued to report increases on balance. 7/30/63 -33-Prospects for the automobile industry remained favorable. Mostplants would close at the end of the current week, and all 1963 modelproduction was to cease next week. Total model year production wouldbe over the 7,300,000 mark, a new record and almost 10 per cent abovelast year. Following the changeover, about 70,000 of the 1964 modelswould be turned out in August and, barring a railroad strike, another500,000 in September. It was anticipated that new models would beintroduced September 26 and 27 for low priced lines and October 3 and 4for the higher priced cars.Preliminary estimates of retail sales for the first half ofJuly showed a continuation of the flat pattern of recent months.District department store sales, however, had remained at the sharplyincreased June level.Bank debits in the Seventh District showed a significant risein June, with almost all of the 46 areas covered reporting increases.At the same time, personal savings deposits in District areas rosefaster than in April and May, reflecting mainly an increase in therate of inflow that reversed the trend of the two previous months.The withdrawal rate had declined through the second quarter, butthe reduction in the final month was relatively small.Net farm income was expected to drop further below the year-ago level during the rest of 1963. Production expenses had continuedto increase, and the larger inventory of livestock was being marketed 7/30/63 -34-at lower prices. Nevertheless, prices of good farm land continued toincrease and rose about 2 per cent during the first half of 1963,according to reports from country bankers.District bank credit declined seasonally in the first threeweeks of July, but for the June-July period as a whole the gainsremained substantial. The net growth over the past seven weeks wasmainly in loans and "other" (non-Federal) securities. Increases inshort-term Governments were also reported in the District, but mainlyat one large bank. Business demand for bank credit still appearedvery moderate. However, recent declines in business borrowings hadbeen concentrated in the public utility, oil, and chemicals categories,while demand from durable goods manufacturers appeared to have strengtheneddespite liquidation of steel inventories. The Reserve Bank's Junequarterly survey of interest rates indicated that the proportion ofloans made at the prime rate was slightly greater than a year agoeven though a smaller percentage of loans was in the largest sizecategory. Major District banks were still actively seeking loansand apparently felt little reserve pressure.As to policy, Mr. Scanlon said he would like to give the mar-ket a little time to adjust to the changes that had been made recently.He proposed no major change in the directive and no change in thediscount rate. In supplying reserves during the period immediately 7/30/63 -35-ahead, it might be appropriate to purchase securities largely in theintermediate sector of the market if it was possible to do so.Mr. Tow noted that wage and salary employment in the TenthDistrict had shown only seasonal changes since the first of thisyear. Among the major industry groups, employment in services andGovernment had advanced, but those gains had been offset by weakeningactivity in other categories. This performance was not in keepingwith employment developments nationally. Total wage and salaryemployment in the United States had increased each month sinceJanuary, and all major industry groups had participated in the advance.A comparison of the trends of manufacturing in the United Statesand the Tenth District brought the recent divergent movements intorather sharp focus. Manufacturing employment reached a high in mid-1962 in both areas and subsequently declined. Since early this year,however, recovery had dominated U. S. manufacturing employment, whilein the Tenth District the decline had continued.Weather conditions in June and July had improved crop and feedconditions in the Tenth District, Mr. Tow said. The wheat crop wasdown from last year's small crop, however, and pasture conditionswere substantially below average. Livestock numbers in the Districtwere considerably higher than last year.. Drought conditions con-tinued to prevail in parts of the region, notably Colorado. Becauseof inadequate subsoil moisture, crops in much of the District are 7/30/63 -36-vulnerable to periods of deficient moisture and high temperatures, Mr.Tow pointed out, but timely rains in most areas had maintained rowcrops in generally favorable condition thus far.Prices of the two major agricultural commodities produced inthe Tenth District--wheat and cattle--had been averaging about 6 percent below year-ago levels in recent months, while prices of feedgrains were higher. If weather conditions were favorable, anincreased level of marketings would about offset the effects of ananticipated lower level of prices on cash receipts as compared withlast year.Mr. Wayne advised that in the Fifth District manufacturingactivity was holding about steady while most other sectors continuedto advarce. In June seasonally adjusted nonfarm employment againincreased slightly. A rise in factory employment contributed tothis gain, but because of shorter hours worked in nondurable goodsindustries, seasonally adjusted factory man-hours declined. In thepast four months nonfarm employment and factory man-hours had per-formed a little less favorably in the District than in the nationas a whole. Rates of insured unemployment rose slightly in theearly part of July, ending several months of uninterrupted declines.The Reserve Bank's latest survey recorded a slight further declinein business optimism. Viewing the near future, a majority of therespondents expected business to do no better than maintain present 7/30/63 -37-levels. Durable goods producers presented a mixed picture, indicatingon balance virtually no net change. Makers of nondurable goods, how-ever, including textiles: reported small declines in orders, shipments.and hours worked. Reports on construction, trade, and bituminous coalshowed continued improvement. In some are s, Virginia in particular,drought conditions had seriously affected pastures and crops, but overmost of the District the farm outlook remained moderately favorable.District weekly reporting banks had experienced a generally gooddemand in all major loan categories during the past three weeks.Nationally, Mr. Wayne observed, business activity seemed to becontinuing its slow advance, but with some tentative signs of slacken-ing. Certain significant indicators of future activity were lessencouraging than earlier and did not show the same uniformity ofmovement as two or three months ago. These signals, like detoursigns on the highway, were current and fleeting; they could be removedor reversed next month. But in the absence of signs pointing tosignificant gains just ahead, they might well be regarded as acaution signal.Turning to the area of policy, Mr. Wayne commented that therehad not yet been sufficient time for the dust to settle following themajor moves of two weeks ago. In fact, from time to time additionaldust was kicked up as new changes were made in the proposed interestequalization tax. Generally, the psychological reaction to the change 7/30/63 -38-in the discount rate had been quite moderate, and the financial mar-kets seemed to have adjusted to it quickly and smoothly. In certainrespects they may have overadjusted--on a few days during the pastweek some short-term rates were well below their levels of a monthearlier. In any event, it was too early to tell what the finalreaction of the financial markets would be, much less to predict theeventual economic effects. In view of the adjustments to be made,Mr. Wayne concurred in the view that a continuation of present policywas indicated, with the proviso that the low level of certain short-term rates at the middle of last week was an unplanned aberration andnot a part of System policy. He was disposed to agree with Messrs.Ellis and Irons with respect to the directive, and he would notdesire, of course, any change in the discount rate at this time.Mr. Mills said he agreed with some of the policy essentialscontained in Mr. Hayes' statement.. Speaking crudely, and within theframework of interest rates, he (Mr. Mills) had been forced, unhappily,to the conclusion that the Federal Reserve System had reached the pointwhere it must either "put up or shut up." To set forth his case some-what more forally, Mr. Mills presented the following statement:To use a figure of speech, the Federal Open MarketCommittee crossed the Rubicon and burned its bridges be-hind it when a majority agreed to a somewhat restrictivecredit policy. I continue to believe that policy inde-feasible from an economic standpoint and that. its con-tinuance harbors grave risks of economic damage by wayof curtailing the availability of credit and placingdownward pressure on the money supply. However, as 7/30/63-39-matters stand, there is no choice other than to continuethe credit policy now in force.1. Inasmuch as the effectiveness of the Treasury'sproposed "interest equalization tax" is open to question,the burden of combatting the balance of payments problemhas fallen on the shoulders of the Federal Reserve Systemthrough the enforcement of a restrictive credit policyaimed at developing a higher interest rate structure.2. Inasmuch as interest yields on U. S. Governmentsecurities and other interest-bearing securities have notmoved into alignment with the 3-1/2 per cent discount rateadopted by the Federal Reserve Banks, At will now be neces-sary to accomplish that alignment by reducing the supply ofreserves at the disposal of the commerial banking system.Otherwise, the financial community will be confused aboutthe Federal Reserve System's policy intentions. Further-more, the balance of payments interest rate defensivesought after would not be achieved.In the light of the circumstances described, I amregrettably of the opinion that the Federal ReserveSystem's policy actions until the next meeting of theFederal Open Market Committee must move in the directionof a still more restrictive credit policy. Judging fromthe uncertainties in the foreign exchange markets thatfollowed upon the announcement of the "interest equaliza-tion tax" proposal, the possibility cannot be ruled out.that the Federal Reserve System may shortly be compelledto take emergency action in the field of discount ratesin order to drive home in the minds of the general publicthat the United States is prepared to act decisively indefense of the dollar.Mr. Mills added that he had been interested in Mr. Hayes'reference to a staff study of the possible use of reverse repurchaseagreements. This was a subject worthy of study. Personally, however,he rather hoped that there might develop from the study a recommenda-tion that the possibility be discarded because he was fearful it wouldbe just another gimmick added to the wide range of gimmicks with which 7/30/63the System was already operating.. These had resulted in handcuffing theGovernment securities market and making it a completely artificial andmanipulated market.Mr. Robertson presented the following statement:It is very clear that financial circles, both here andabroad, are still in process of adjusting to the officialactions and statements of the past two weeks. These adjust-ments are not helped by the unprecedented nature of thesteps taken or proposed. Market participants have littlein the way of historical experience to guide their responses.Some people, of course, have been telling us that the closestprecedent to our recent action was the discount rate increaseof 1931: but I am sure all of us hope for more favorable con-sequences than that. In any evert, I am sure our proper roleas central bankers at this time is not to panic at some ofthe gusts and cross winds, but to hold a steady course untilthe storm of reaction dies down and we can judge more soberlywhere our navigation has taken us.I was opposed to the step of raising discount rates atthis juncture. But, that action having been taken, I thinkit is the better part of wisdom to allow it a chance tomake whatever contribution it can to the achievement ofcurrent policy objectives. These I take to be some eleva-tion of short rates, but without any basic reduction inreserve and credit availability. By all the past preceptsof U. S. monetary management, this is very close to a con-tradiction in terms, and we shall have to move very carefullyto avoid having market responses prove that contradictionfor all to see. Therefore, I think it is imperative thatwe speak in very clear terms to the Account Manager todayas to what we want him to achieve, and what order of prioritywe assign to potentially conflicting desires. For example,I would think it essential that we restore the reference toreserve availability which was deleted from the second para-graph of the current directive at the last meeting. I wouldregard it as a proper posture for the Desk to strive forfree reserves in the $100-$200 million range, with Federalfunds rates ranging between 3 and 3-1/2 per cent and perhapsdealer loans of 3-1/4 -3-3/4 per cent. I would not expectthe Desk always to hit these targets if inadvertent circum-stances should develop, but that does not destroy their-40- 7/30/63value as reference points for operations. Now that the dis-count rate transition is over, we ought to be able to expecta return to a more reasonable relationship between bankreserve positions and these narrow money market rates. ButI do not think it is practical for us to go further, andinclude a particular range of the Treasury bill rate, oreven of a covered yield spread against foreign bills, in ourcommunications with the Desk. However much a particulartrend in these latter rates is desired around this table,they are being affected these days by many influences beyondthe reach of the Account Manager. Depending upon which waymarket attitudes jell, and what other official actions aretaken or withdrawn, the bill rate may end up close to thediscount rate or well below it. But the Account Managershould rot be asked to fight these kinds of rate movementwith open market operations. Our aim should be to holdreserve availability steady, along with the new discountrate, and see where the bill rate, longer term rates,customer lending rates--and bank reserve use--finallysettle down. Then we will know better what we have managedto accomplish, and whether or not we like the results.If we are to take this tack, then the second paragraphof the current directive ought, as a mnimum, to have re-stored the phrase concerning reserve expansion that wasdeleted at the July 9 meeting. I personally would favorgiving to reserve needs at least as high priority as moneymarket conditions, by the use of language something likethe following:"To implement this policy, System open mar-ket operations shall be conducted with a view tofostering a moderate pace of reserve expansion,while maintaining reasonably stable money marketconditions."What we can accomplish by this, only time will tell.I, for one, am very skeptical about making any inroads onour capital outflow by this device. In particular, I doubtit can have much effect on bank loans abroad, so long asreserve availability is not cut back enough to slow domesticand international lending alike. If a more discriminatingeffect on bank loans to foreigners is to be sought, it mayhave to be done by the exercise of moral suasion on the fewbanks most directly involved. This is not a procedure I like,-40- 7/30/63 -42-but I dislike even more the apparent alternatives of reducingreserve availability across the board or adopting some formalversion of capital controls.Whatever course we take today to steer our way throughthe market currents of the moment, we cannot afford to losesight of the underlying problems still plaguing our economy.And let me remind you that, while the Brookings study suggeststhat fundamental forces are at work that may remedy our balanceof payments deficit by the mid-1960's, no similarly optimisticnote is cited by studies of our chronic underemployment ofresources. It seems obvious to me which of these two basicproblems is more in need of additional assistance from mone-tary policy over the longer run.Mr. Shepardson observed that the policy proposals made aroundthe table this morning seemed actually to fall within a relativelynarrow range, even though they were expressed in numerous ways. Atpresent, he noted, there was a confused and unsettled market situation,and in his opinion the System should do whatever it could to clarifyits own position. The approach outlined by Mr. Ellis appeared to himmost nearly to reach that point, although the targets cited by Mr.Ellis were not a great deal different from those mentioned by anumber of others. As Mr. Shepardson saw it, the Committee's objectiveshould be to refrain from adding to prevailing uncertainties. Insofaras the System could clarify the intent of its discount rate action,that would be helpful. This would mean, according to his view, somemove through open market operations to validate the discount rateincrease in terms of short-term rates without at the same timedeliberately reducing the availability of reserves. 7/30/63 -43-As to the directive, Mr. Shepardson suggested that it mightbe well, as others had proposed, to consider a rewording.Mr. Mitchell expressed the view that this was a difficultperiod for monetary policy, and for those charged with formulatingand carrying out monetary policy, with many voices outside the Systemproclaiming what the System should and would do. In present circum-stances, he felt that the economy should be given a chance to let thebasic factors of supply and demand operate, and it would be desirablefor the Committee to concentrate its attention on the availability ofreserves. It should not be forgotten, he noted, that the Committeemust formulate policy in advance of the availability of statistics;most of those presently available were for the month of June, withsome preliminary figures for the first part of July. If the economywas in the process of going flat, which was possible, and the Com-mittee should decide on the use of rate objectives primarily, itcould get into serious availability problems. If it developed laterthat the economy actually had turned down at a time when the FederalReserve was contracting the availability of reserves, that would makea poor record. Accordingly, as he had said, he would concentrateattention at this point on the level of free reserves. He would beinclined to use as a target the $100-$200 million range and see howthe markets would react. Under these conditions, he would not worrytoo much about what happened to the bill rate during the next two orthree weeks. 7/30/63 -44-Mr. Hickman commented that domestic business activity had movedinto the summer slack season with the weight of evidence still pointingto continued economic expansion. The broader measures of economicactivity had advanced throughout the second quarter. Several lesscomprehensive series, which are watched closely for clues or possibleomens, had not behaved quite as favorably as earlier, but that did notwarrant, in his opinion, a revision of appraisal.The second quarter increase in gross national product had beenin line with characteristic rates of rise during periods of moderatebusiness expansion. Furthermore, the increase was entirely in finaldemand, with no assistance from the inventory account. The June risein the index of industrial production, which marked the fifth succes-sive month of gain, reflected an appreciable increase in final productoutput after a number of months of relative sluggishness; as had beenexpected, the industrial materials grouping contributed nothing to theincrease because of the cutback in steel. In the steel industry, eventswere proceeding as foreshadowed, with a bottoming out in productionexpected for late August or early September.Personal income had risen again in June for the fourth succes-sive month, largely because of a persistent upward trend in wage andsalary disbursements typical of expansion periods. Retail sales re-mained on a high plateau, with no significant change since February. 7/30/63 -45-The latest information an auto sales, covering the first 20 days ofJuly, indicated continued strength in that strategic part of consumertakings.More complete information for June on the Fourth Districtconfirmed the expansion reported at the previous Committee meeting,Mr. Hickman said, and early reports for July showed that the Junegains on balance had been at least sustained. Department store salescontinued to unprove from their sluggish performance earlier this year.The rate of insured unemployment in mid-July was unchanged from June,and remained at a favorably low level; so far this was trie even inthe steel centers, contrary to previous experience during steel cut-backs. Widespread improvements in the regional unemployment situationduring the past few months had been officially recognized in labormarket reclassifications for June, with one-third of the District'smajor centers being upgraded. Electric power production had risenfurther in July, except for those areas where primary steel productiondominated developments. As expected, steel ingot output in the Dis-trict declined sharply in the past three weeks; shipments were reportedto have been sustained somewhat by the threat of a railroad strike.Earning assets at District reporting banks had expanded sharplyin recent weeks in contrast to the national totals. District memberbanks had not been torrowing in significant amounts since the time ofthe discount rate action. 7/30/63 -46-Turning now to System policy, Mr. Hickman said he found it im-possible to isolate the impact of the recent discount rate actionbecause of other pronouncements and proposals dealing with the balanceof payments situation. To the extent that the behavior of financialmarkets both here and overseas told a story in this short period,recent developments did not appear to have been consistent withnational policy objectives. Probably the best the System could dounder these circumstances was to wait for the dust to settle, makingsure in the interim that there was no excessive ease in the moneymarket. He would think in terms of a 3-3/8 per cent bill rate, withFederal funds trading at 3-1/2 per cent most of the time and freereserves allowed to fluctuate more or less as they would in theshort run. He would not be disturbed if free reserves went to zero,or changed to net borrowed reserves temporarily. The situation couldbe re-examined, if, to hold up the bill rate, free reserves fellbelow $100 million for an extended period of time.At the same time, Mr. Hickman added, he was unhappy aboutrecent attempcs to commit the System to maintain, or reduce, thelevel of long-term interest rates. There was, in his opinion, apotentially dangerous situation, which could lead to a de factorestoration of the pre-1951 pegging. As Chairman Martin has statedrecently, ". .it is essential that monetary policy remain flexibleand uncommitted--free to move either to check an unwanted and 7/30/63 -47-inappropriate tightening of credit, should it develop, or to defendmore aggressively the international position of the dollar, shouldthat be necessary." It seemed to Mr. Hickman that the System hadan obligation to speak out forthrightly on this matter on everyappropriate occasion.Mr. Bopp reported that the economic situation in the ThirdDistrict had improved somewhat during the past several weeks. Threelabor market areas had been upgraded, although their ranking wasstill poor. Increases in unemployment were no worse than expectedwith the influx of school graduates into the labor market. He alsonoted an improvement in department store sales, cutting into theDistrict's year-to-year deficit. Some of these gains may disappearas steel production declines become reflected in other indicators.On balance, however, the picture looked a bit brighter than usual.Total bank credit showed a decline, and business loans werestill lagging behind last year, but there continued to be some pressureon bank reserve positions.Mr. Bopp stated that he had voted favorably on the policydirective at the July 9 meeting because it seemed to him-that theuse of the different instruments of monetary policy should be con-sistent and an increase in the discount rate was then imminent. Undersuch circumstances, it had seemed undesirable to reverse what had takenplace in terms of yields only to reverse again. His vote, therefore, 7/30/63 -48-was essentially a vote on tactics. As to the future, it was still anopen question whether short-term rates could be maintained at the newlevels, and reserve availability at the old. Under these conditions,he agreed with the view that it would be desirable to maintainessentially an even keel for the time being, and to supply reservesthrough purchases of coupon issues, selling bills if necessary. Inhis opinion, emphasis should be placed on the availability of reserves.Mr. Bryan reported that developments in the Sixth District weregoing along about in line with the national economy with a slight ten-dency for nonfarm employment to rise less than nationally. Differencesfrom the national averages were chiefly in financial statistics; theDistrict had h.d a sharp rise in bank debits and in bank loans andinvestments. The Reserve Bank's agricultural economist had reviewedthe sharp expansion in lending to farmers in all sectors and had pre-sented the view that this lending was sound and creditworthy, but Mr.Bryan remained skeptical.Mr. Bryan stated that he was uncertain about any recommenda-tions he might make at this juncture regarding national monetary policy.Without doubt, the System was confronted with some thorny problems.If, after raising the discount rate, the System did not follow through,at some reasonable interval, toward making the new discount rateeffective, the System would be inconsistent. On the other hand, theSystem ran a considerable risk, in making the rate effective, of doing 7/30/63 -49-injury to the economy because in his belief it would not be possible tomake the discount rate effective without working to some appreciabledegree in the field of reserve availability. Of the two alternatives,he would prefer, for the immediate future, to allow the dust to settleand to maintain reserve availability, measured in free reserves atapproximately $100-$200 million, or somewhere in that range.Mr. Bryan also mentioned the concern he felt about the yieldcurve on Government bonds, which was quite flat. He felt the time wasgone when either the Federal Reserve System or the Treasury could appro-priately manipulate the yield curve. There was the real danger of anunfunding of the public debt, which would be tragic for both theTreasury and the System. He hoped that neither the System nor theTreasury would make further efforts to manipulate the rate curve.Mr. Bryan then turned to the dealings of the System and theTreasury in foreign currencies and expressed concern. The System hada short position of about $150 million in foreign currencies, to whichmust be added the Treasury's short position (estimated at $650 million).Altogether, this got up to a fairly high level.Mr. Shuford reported that in the Eighth District month-to-monthimprovements had not been particularly noticeable. However, in evalu-ating conditions in the District, it was evident that there had beenrather significant improvement since the first of the year. In themajor metropolitan areas, employment had increased about 2 per cent 7/30/63 -50-since late 1962. Industrial use of electric power had risen sharply,with gains registered in all seven metropolitan areas. After an earlylull, department store sales, bank debits, and business loans had allshown improvement. As to the agricultural picture for the District,farming conditions so far this year had been good. Corn and soy beanswere developing ahead of schedule; cotton prospects were quite good;and rice and tobacco crops were above average. Prices of major agri-cultural commodities seemed to be holding at about the same levels aslast year. In the area of livestock (mainly hog and beef) prices,there had been a recovery since the first of the year.Turning to monetary policy, Mr. Shuford noted the continuanceand persistence of uncertainties, which the Committee had discussed.Among these uncertainties, there was the steel situation, the un-settled railroad wage dispute, the question of public acceptance ofthe new-model autos, and the reaction to the President's recentbalance of payments message to Congress. All of these things hadintroduced uncertainty into the picture. In these circumstances, hefavored no change in policy at this meeting. Even though there wasthe possibility of seeming inconsistent by not following through withsome action in support of the discount rate change, he did not feelthat he or the System were alone insofar as inconsistency was con-cerned. He would favor, if possible, no lessening in the rate ofmonetary expansion, and he believed that the money supply should, ifpossible, continue to increase at about the same rate that had prevailed 7/30/63 -51-during the past several months. With respect to the bill rate, hebelieved it would be desirable if that rate could continue in therange that had prevailed since the last meeting. Some emphasisshould be given to the matter of reserve availability, but at thistime it might be inappropriate to focus on any specific level of freereserves. With the changed relationships between the discount rateand market rates, it might be misleading to compare the new levelsof free reserves with those that had prevailed prior to the discountrate change.Mr. Balderston observed that now, 29 months past the lastcyclical low, domestic business still seemed to be moving upward.Accordingly, he felt that the foreign dangers to the future healthof the economy should be the principal concern of this Committee atthe moment. This was not to deny the possibility that the domesticeconomy might even now be topping off, which would present stillfurther complications. While he would not refer to the manymeasures of economic strength, he was heartened by a couple ofcharacteristics that surprised him. One was that individual savingin relation to disposable income was holding up. Another was thatmanufacturing productivity in the second quarter of this year was4.9 per cent above the year-ago figure.But according to a recent tally the first half year wagesettlements showed a larger average increase than in the corresponding 7/30/63 -52-period a year ago. The over-all median settlement was 8 cents an hourcompared with 7.7 cents for the same period last year, and the manu-facturing median climbed even more, from 6.8 cents in the first halfof 1962 to 7.3 cents in the first half of 1963. Moreover, deferredincreases continued to show up in one of every two settlements, anddespite the unemployment of one out of every five inexperienced andunskilled workers, the minimum wage was to be raised again in anothermonth. This would complete the third of such raises since 1950.It was little wonder that this country's failures to reducelabor costs and export prices did not go unnoted abroad. In hisreport to the shareholders of the Netherlands Bank, Dr. Holtrop notedthat in the last four years labor costs per unit of industrial pro-duction fell by about 3 per cent, while they were rising in theNetherlands by 14 per cent and in Germany by 21 per cent. But thetotal wages paid per person employed rose by 17 per cent; and so Dr.Holtrop noted that a reduction in the cost cf American industrialproduction would have been perfectly possible in those years. How-ever, the index of prices for American exports rose by 4 per centand that for industrial finished products by as much as 9 per cent.Dr. Holtrop added that none of this would concern Europe if therewere no balance of payments problem; however, Europe became involvedif it was asked to join the United States in adopting measures tosafeguard stability in the international system of payments. 7/30/63 -53-Mr. Balderston went on to say that the President's balance ofpayments package encouraged him a little but not much. Specifically,he would apply selective controls at the point where he thought theywould work, and the best place to use them was on the Government's ownspending and lending. He hoped that the Government would make someone individual responsible for slowing down on payments against currentcommitments to place dollars abroad and to ride herd on future commit-ments resulting from dollar diplomacy.As to the right policy for the System at this particular junc-ture, Mr. Balderston pointed out that the System has continued to feedto the commercial banks at a 3 per cent annual growth rate the reservesrequired to support private deposits. Bank credit, that is loans andinvestments, are continuing to rise at an annual rate of about 10 percent, which is about the same as last year's rate of 9 per cent. Ascompared with the last half of 1962, excess reserves are about $100million lower, and discountings about $200 million higher. Nonborrowedreserves have remained about constant since the turn of the year, butit is significant that the use by banks of reserves made available tothem has continued to rise at a vigorous rate. The ratio of loans tototal deposits at all commercial banks has been above 54.5 per centever since 1960 and is currently over 57 per cent, whereas when hecame to the Board of Governors nine years ago, it was below 40 percent. Of course the strong flow of savings into commercial banks 7/30/63 -54 -now added to their desire to invest whatever they could not lend. Lastyear they took one out of six dollars off the increase in mortgages andfour out of five dollars of the net gain in State and local securities.The fact that bankers have not seen fit to curb their investments sofar meant to him that they must not be feeling restraint. The aggres-sive efforts of bankers to put their funds to work not only at homebut abroad led him to wonder whether the System had a good answer tothe editor of Barron's when he said: "The-Federal Reserve andTreasury have poured forth a flood of easy credit and a sea of redink. Excessive liquidity has now become a mounting threat to thedollar."With respect to short-run monetary policy, Mr. Balderstonsaid that he felt it would be desirable to try to hold steady forthe next three weeks until market developments could be seen andanalyzed more clearly. However, he anticipated that the next move,when it came, should be on the side of greater firmness.Mr. Balderston concluded with the comment that the FederalReserve System must do in its best judgment the job it had to do,that is, to make the right decisions at the right time with regardto monetary policy.. It could not afford to be bound by commitments,whatever they may happen to be. If the time should come for greateror lesser monetary ease, that was the System's job and responsibility. 7/30/63 -55-Chairman Martin observed that he was glad Mr, Balderston hadconcluded his remarks on the note he had, for it reminded him (theChairman) that he wanted to take a minute to set the record straightin one respect. In all of the discussions incident to the President'sbalance of payments message, he (Chairman Martin) had refused to makeany commitment with regard to Federal Reserve policy. The quotationMr. Hickman had read (which was from Chairman Martin's testimonybefore a Congressional committee on July 22) reflected the positionhe had taken consistently. He felt sure that his record was com--pletely clear in that regard.Chairman Martin went on to express the view that. the Systemwas not following in any way a restrictive policy, and had not inrecent years. It had recently been following a slightly less stimu--lative policy, but he happened to be one of those who believed thattoo much stimulation was self-defeating. He also believed that agood deal of the chronic unemployment in this country might be relatedto the balance of payments situation, and that until the balance ofpayments problem was brought better into line the country was likelyto be faced with increasing rather than diminishing unemployment.The Chairman noted, as one element in the current situation,that the demand for bank credit continued to be less than many hadanticipated. At the same time there had developed a large volumeof savings, encouraged by the payment of higher interest rates,. that 7/30/63 -56-had made available for certain types of operations a quantity of moneyfar in excess of what he would like to see. He doubted that the costand the availability of money could clearly be separated. Neverthe-less, in certain circumstances--and he thought they currently pre-vailed--it was his opinion that a fairly good case could be made, fora limited time, for only modest adjustments, if any, in short or long--term rates. He was inclined to feel that rate stability should besought until such time as it could be seen whether the businesssituation was likely to improve further in the fall and whether therewas improvement or further deterioration in the balance of payments.Factors overhanding the markets at present included not only thebalance of payments problem but the possibility of a railroadstrike and various other considerations that had been mentionedduring today's discussion.At the Chairman's request, there were distributed at thispoint alternative formulations of a possible current policy directivethat had been drafted by the staff for the Committee's consideration.According to one alternative, the second paragraph of the directivewould call for open market operations to be conducted with a viewto continuing the present degree of firmness in the money market,while accommodating moderate expansion in aggregate bank reserves.According to the other alternative, operations would be conducted 7/30/63 -57-with a view to attaining a slightly greater degee of firmness in themoney market, while accommodating moderate expansion, in aggregate bankreserves.In commenting on the directive, Chairman Martin indicated thathe was inclined to agree with the view expressed by some during today'sdiscussion that perhaps at some point a general rewording of thedirective should be attempted. As to the next three weeks, however,it appeared to him that the differences of opinion as to policy ex-pressed around the table had been so slight that there was littleimmediate need for any substantial change in the directive.Mr. Mills commented that he would like the record to show that,although it was distasteful to him, he would be obliged to dissent fromany consensus in favor of continuing only the present degree of marketfirmness. He felt that the System had made a mistake some years ago,in 1957, by not making the discount rate change at that time an effec-tive rate, and that the System could not afford to repeat the mistake.At that time it had confused the market as to its intentions and ob-jectives. In his view the Committee was inevitably moving toward amore restrictive policy. The majority had made a basic decision,and this having been done there was an obligation on the part of theCommittee to carry through on the course it had set.Chairman Martin responded that it was quite appropriate forMr. Mills' comment to be included in the records. Also, for the record, 7/30/63however, he (Chairman Martin) would like to say that he did not agreewith the view that a mistake was made several years ago on the occasionmentioned by Mr. Mills.Mr. Hayes said he agreed strongly with Mr. Mills as to theneed for supporting the recent discount rate action at the presenttime.Chairman Martin then inquired whether it would seem appropriateto put the question in terms of a further substantial reduction in thelevel of reserve availability, if necessary, in order to keep theFederal funds rate at, say, 3-1/2 per cent and the bill rate around3-3/8 per cent. Mr. Hayes replied that he would prefer to put thequestion in terms of conducting open market operations in a way thatwould tend to support a Federal funds rate of 3-1/2 per cent and abill rate close to 3-3/8 per cent, and taking the consequences interms of reserve availability, hoping that reserves could remain aboutwhere they were but making that a subordinate consideration. Mr. Millsstated that this would be his position Mr, Mitchell suggested, how-ever, that the question be put in terms of making the availability ofreserves a primary consideration rather than a residual factor. Thequestion could be stated simply on the basis of maintaining freereserves between $100 and $200 million for the next three weeks .In discussion of this point, Mr., Mills said he felt that theconcept of a level of free reserves as a primary objective had long-58- 7/30/63 -59-since been rejected. Under certain conditions there could be movementsof interest rates that would not conform at all to the free reservelevel. As had been stated on many occasions, it was the tone andfeel of the market that must take precedence. It would seem to himthat the instruction to the Manager for the next three weeks wouldhave to be conditioned largely on the tone and feel of the market,consistent with whatever consensus was arrived at by the Committee.Chairman Martin expressed agreement with the view that thelevel of free reserves was not a proper sole target, just one guide.Mr. Ellis, who was asked to restate at this juncture the tar-gets he had suggested earlier during the meeting, indicated that theywould include a bill rate in the area of 3-3/8 per cent and a Federalfunds rate between 3-1/4 and 3-1/2 per cent, with a free reserve tar-get level at $100 million, subject to some variation in either direction.His general thought had been to follow a course that would allow themarket to find its own footing again. If doubts arose in the conductof open market operations, he would resolve them on the side offfirmness rather than ease.Mr. Mitchell indicated that he considered that the real issuerelated to what course the Account Manager would follow if the severaltargets became mutually inconsistent .If the Committee wanted toinstruct the Manager to protect the bill rate even at the expense ofnet free reserves turning into net borrowed reserves, that was one 7/30/63 --60-policy. If the Committee wanted to instruct the Manager to aim at sometarget of free reserves, say, $100-$150 million, and see how the mar-ket reacted, that would be an entirely different policy.Mr. Hayes noted that the targets expressed by Mr. Ellis includeda bill rate of around 3-3/8 per cent. Actually, the bill rate had notbeen close to that level during the past three weeks. Therefore, whilehe rather liked the targets embodied in Mr. Ellis' suggested policy, hedid not think such a policy could be regarded as one of no materialchange.After further discussion as to how the policy question for thenext three weeks might best be expressed, Mr. Hayes commented that inlight of all of the discussion that had taken place, he was inclinedto revert to an earlier suggestion that the question be decided interms of the alternatives included in the draft directive materialthat had been distributed.Upon further consideration, there was general agreement witha suggestion that a vote be taken on a policy directive that wouldcall, in the second paragraph, for policy to be implemented, in thecontext of a higher discount rate, by open market operations conductedwith a view to attaining a slightly greater degree of firmness in themoney market, while accommodating moderate expansion in aggregate bankreserves. 7/30/63Accordingly, upon motion duly made.and seconded, the Federal Reserve Bankof New York was authorized and directed,until otherwise directed by the Committee,to execute transactions in the SystemAccount in accordance with the followingcurrent economic policy directive.It is the Committee's current policy to accommodatemoderate growth in bank credit, while putting increasedemphasis on money market conditions that would contributeto an improvement in the capital accountof the U.S.balance of payments. This policy takes into considera-tion the continuing adverse balance of payments positionand its cumulative effects and the high level of domesticbusiness activity, as well as the increases in bank credit,money supply, and the reserve base in recent months. Atthe same time, however, it recognizes the continuing under-utilization of resources.To implement this policy in the context of a higherdiscount rate, System open market operations shall beconducted with a view to attaining a slightly greaterdegree of firmness in the money market, while accommodatingmoderate expansion in aggregate bank reserves.Votes for this action: Messrs.Martin, Hayes, Balderston, Irons, Mills,and Shepardson. Votes against thisaction: Messrs. Bopp, Mitchell, Robert--son, and Scanlon.It was noted that the Account Manager had suggested, in his oralreport today, that the continuing authority directive to the FederalReserve Bank of New York, which had been amended on June 18, 1963, toraise from $1 billion to $1.5 billion the limit on changes in the SystemOpen Market Account in the period between Committee meetings, might bechanged again to reduce the leeway to the former-figure of $1 billion.-61- 7/30/63Upon motion duly made and seconded,and by unanimous vote, section 1(a) ofthe continuing authority directive wasamended so as to authorize and directthe Federal Reserve Bank of New York,to the extent necessary to carry outthe current economic policy directive:To buy or sell United States Government securities inthe open market, from or to Government securities dealersand forein and international accounts maintained at theFederal Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, regular, ordeferred delivery basis, for the System Open Market Accountat market prices and, for such Account, to exchange matur-ing United States Government securities with the Treasuryor allow them to mature without replacement; provided thatthe aggregate amount of such securities held in such Account(including forward commitments, but not including suchspecial short-term certificates of indebtedness as may bepurchased from the Treasury under paragraph 2 hereof) shallnot be increased or decreased by more than $1 billion duringany period between meetings of the Committee.It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open MarketCommittee would be held on Tuesday, August 20, 1963.The meeting then adjourned.Secretary