 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in theoffices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington on Tuesday, February 11, 1964, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Martin, ChairmanBalderstonBoppClayDaaneIronsMillsMitchellRobertsonScanlonShepardsonTreiber, Alternatefor Mr. HayesMessrs. Hickman, Wayne, and Shuford, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs.theandEllis, Bryan, and Deming, Presidents ofFederal Reserve Banks of Boston, Atlanta,Minneapolis, respectivelyMr. Young, SecretaryMr. Sherman, Assistant SecretaryMr. Kenyon, Assistant SecretaryMr. Hexter, Assistant General CounselMr. Noyes, EconomistMessrs. Baughman, Brill, Eastburn, Garvy,Green, Holland, Koch, and Tow, AssociateEconomistsMr. Stone, Manager, System Open Market AccountMr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of GovernorsMr. Fauver, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Broida, Assistant Secretary, Board of GovernorsMr. Wood, Associate Adviser, Division of Inter-national Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Axilrod, Chief, Government Finance Section,Division of Research and Statistics,Board of Governors 2/11/64 -2-Mr. Hemmings, First Vice President,Federal Reserve Bank of San FranciscoMessrs. Sanford, Mann, Ratchford, Jones, andParsons, Vice Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of New York, Cleveland,Richmond, St. Louis, and Minneapolis,respectivelyMr. Sternlight, Assistant Vice President,Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkMr. Brandt, Assistant Vice President, FederalReserve Bank of AtlantaMr. Anderson, Financial Economist, FederalReserve Bank of BostonMr. Runyon, Economist, Federal Reserve Bankof San FranciscoBefore this meeting there had been distributed to the membersof the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System OpenMarket Account on foreign exchange market conditions and on Open MarketAccount and Treasury operations in foreign currencies for the periodJanuary 28 through February 5, 1964, and a supplementary report coveringthe period February 6 through February 10, 1964. Copies of these reportshave been placed in the files of the Committee.Supplementing the written reports, Mr. Sanford commented that goldsales of at least $52 million were expected over the rest of the month,and with only $48 million in the Stabilization Fund, the Treasury wastransferring $50 million from the gold stock to the Fund today. TheRussians remained out of the gold market and private demand in the Londongold market, while unspectacular, had until the last two days been largeenough to absorb all new production coming onto the market. The UnitedStates received $23.4 million as a distribution from the gold pool. 2/11/64 -3-(On Thursday, the day when the gold stock reduction would bereleased to the press, the Treasury would be making the anticipated firstdrawing on the International Monetary Fund under the $500 million standbyarrangement announced last July as part of President Kennedy's balanceof payments package. The drawing would total $125 million, and it wouldbe publicly announced.As the Committee would recall, Mr. Sanford continued, the standbyarrangemeat was made to meet the problem that arises when the Fund cannotaccept dollars in repayment of foreign countries' repurchase obligations(because its dollar holdings would exceed 75 per cent of the U. S. quota).By drawing foreign currencies from the fund and selling them to thosemembers making repayments to the Fund, the chance was reduced of theircoming to the U. S. for gold to effect such repurchases. The $125 millionof foreign currencies that the U. S. would be drawing was expected to besufficient to match foreign countries' repayments to the Fund throughthe end of April. The largest repurchase now scheduled was one of $60million equivalent by Canada, which would be announced at about the sametime as the U. S. drawing.Except for the German mark at the end of last week, Mr. Sanfordobserved, the foreign exchange markets had been fairly quiet during thepast two weeks, with no particular pressure on the dollar. For almosttwo weeks until last Wednesday the strength of the German mark hadtemporarily abated, reflecting mainly the calming effects of the GermanFederal Bank's announcement on January 23 that it was not contemplating 2/11/64 -4-any new measures to deal with the German payments surplus. Last Thursdayand Friday, however, the demand for marks again increased to the pointwhere the German Federal Bank had to intervene. So far, the German authori-ties had felt able to hold for their own account the dollars they hadpicked up in the market, having in mind the reduction in their dollarholdings early in January when the German commercial banks had reversedtheir year-end window dressing operations. Nevertheless, with thepossibility of a revival of speculation on mark revaluation and theprospect of a seasonal tightening of the German money market in March,the System might have to face the necessity of making fresh drawings onits mark swap to mop up part of Germany's dollar intake.The Swiss franc market had retained the moderate ease it developedfollowing the Swiss Government's announcemen.s of proposed measures tocurb the inflow of funds from abroad and to restrain the Swiss boom.However, the Swiss franc had not yet moved very far from the ceilingbut with some further easing the System might be able to acquire somefrancs for the purpose of starting to repay its Swiss franc commitments.Today the Swiss franc was quoted at 4.323 to the dollar, as compared withthe effective ceiling of 4.3150.The liquidation of the System's guilder swap drawing had sloweddown in this period, as the decline in the guilder rate and the Nether-lands Bank's sales of dollars in the market came to a halt. The Accounthad been able to purchase only $4 million of guilders from the NetherlandsBank over and above the amount reported at the last meeting, and using 2/11/64 -5-$1 million of its guilder balances, it reduced the swap drawing to $45million from $50 million.The Italian lira continued under pressure. During January the Bankof Italy had lost about $250 million, mainly reflecting large repayments offoreign indebtedness by Italian commercial banks. Italy's reserve declinewas being cushioned by the second $50 million drawing on the System swap(mentioned at the last meeting) and by the purchase by the System ofanother $50 million lire which the System had sold forward to the Treas-ury. The Italians might be expected to need further assistance beforetoo long, as the Bank of Italy had cashed in one-half of the U. S.Government certificates from the last drawing. The recently-formedItalian Government could ill afford the development of even a semblanceof a speculative crisis, in view of the delicate political situation.Meanwhile, they were proceeding to reduce bank liquidity, both at homeand abroad.Sterling still had not shown the strength it usually exhibited atthis time of the year. The discount on forward sterling, moreover, hadwidened slightly. The possibility that the markets might be beginningto react to the forthcoming British elections seemed to be getting stronger.The British Treasury bill rate had edged up in the last two weeks, but thewidening of the discount on sterling had more than offset this increase.The covered arbitrage differential in terms of Treasury bills was now about1/4 of 1 per cent in favor of New York. The differential in terms ofother instruments--such as finance paper--remained slightly in favor ofLondon, but selected banks reported that no funds were moving. 2/11/64At: the request of the Chairman, Mr. Sanford summarized Open MarketAccount operations in foreign currencies during the period January 28through February 10. Operations which had been for value within thisparticular period, he said, were as follows: (1) the Bank of Italy drew$50 million under the $250 million swap arrangement with the System, thusmaking its outstanding drawings $100 million, (2) the Federal Reservebought from the Bank of Italy a second $50 million of lire and immedi-ately sold the lire for three-month forward delivery to the U. S. Treasury,bringing the tctal for this type of operation to $100 million; (3) theBank of Italy had renewed for another three months its maturing $50million swap drawing from the System, this being the first renewal;(4) the System reduced its swap drawing from the Netherlands Bank by$5 million to $45 million, using $4 million of guilders bought from theNetherlands Bank and $1 million from its balances; (5) the System paidoff at maturity the remaining $5.5 million of outstanding drawings on theBank of France, by use of francs previously bought forward, and the swaparrangement with the Bank of France was now completely on a standby basis;(6) a maturing $30 million swap drawing on the Swiss National Bank wasrolled over for three months, this being the first renewal of that drawing;and (7) the swap arrangements with the Bank of Japan of $150 million, withthe Bank of France of $100 million, and with the German Federal Bank of$250 million were all extended for three months.Mr. Robertson asked whether the transaction in which the Accounthad acquired lire and sold them forward to the Treasury was undertaken at 2/11/64 -7-the Treasury's request, and Mr. Sanford replied that the transaction wasmade in cooperation with the Treasury. The Lire would be used ultimatelyto repay the Treasury's outstanding lira-denominated bonds.In response to questions by Mr. Mitchell, Mr. Sanford reportedthat Italy held about $200 million equivalent in lira-denominated U. S.Treasury bonds, and that the System had sold forward to the Treasury $100million equivalent of lira. The Italians had drawn $100 million on theswap with the System, of which they had disbursed all but $25 million.Mr. Daane asked what public announcements were planned of theprospective U. S. drawing from the IMF and what reaction to the drawingmight be expected.Mr. Sanford replied that a press release on Thursday of this weekwould explain that the drawing was a technical matter related to theannouncement last July of the $500 million standby arrangement. TheCanadians would be announcing the repayment of their debt to the Fund atabout the same time. He would expect the foreign reaction to be favorable,as it was last July.Mr. Mills asked whether the purpose of the debt to the Fund thatthe United States was assuming was to accommodate Canada and the Fund,and Mr. Sanford replied that in his judgment its purpose was to accommodatethe U. S. In the alternative, a country desiring to make a repayment tothe Fund might buy gold from this country, and the object was to avoid suchgold losses. 2/11/64Mr. Mills then asked whether it oversimplified the matter to saythat countries that would otherwise be obliged to draw on the U. S goldstock in order to make payments in gold to the Fund were in a surplus posi-tion in dollars, so that the U. S. was accommodating both them and itself.Would that lead to a tendency among foreign countries to reduce theirholdings of dollars by compelling the U. S. to draw increasingly on theFund in this kind of arrangement?In response, Mr. Sanford said that while it would appear to beto our advantage to draw in order to avoid gold losses, such drawingswould be well within our control. Mr. Daane added that the arrangementwas linked to debt repayments; countries could not arbitrarily pay sumsinto the Fund when they had no debt to the Fund.Chairman Martin emphasized that all aspects of the proposedU. S. drawing from the Fund were confidential and should be so treatedby persons in the room.Thereupon, upon motion duly made andseconded, and by unanimous vote, the SystemOpen Market Account transactions in foreigncurrencies during the period from January 28through February 10, 1964, were approved,ratified, and confirmed.Mr. Sanford stated that he had no recommendations to place beforethe Committee for consideration at this meeting.Chairman Martin observed that what probably were the most importantfinancial negotiations of the current period were now being conducted bydeputies of the "Group of Ten," who had been meeting periodically since 2/11/64 -9-the Bank and Fund meetings in Washington last autumn. He noted thatMr. Daane had participated in these discussions at their outset as a repre-sentative of the Treasury Department, and was continuing to participate asa representative of the Federal Reserve. Central banks of the othercountries also were represented. The Chairman invited Mr. Daane to commenton the status of the discussions.Mr. Daane said that the most recent meeting of the group was heldin Paris on Jaruary 24, 25, and 27. This meeting, like the earlier oneson which he had reported to the Committee in December, was exploratory, andwas marked by frank expressions of individual views. In one session, ledby Mr. Polak, there was extensive discussion of papers that had been sub-mitted by the Fund on (1) the role of the Fund in the provision ofinternational liquidity, (2) drawings on the gold tranche, and (3) therole of gold. In another session two papers presented by the OECD wereconsidered, on the need for reserves and for international creditarrangements, and on the contribution of the long-term capital marketsto the adjustment process.A third session, Mr. Daane continued, was concerned with threepapers by the BIS, which Mr. Gilbert presented. One of these was aninteresting paper On the Euro-dollar market which was quite favorableto that market. It concluded with the following statement:The Euro-dollar market is today a substantial source ofinternational credit. It brings many lenders and borrowerstogether on more favorable terms to both, and therefore more 2/11/64 -10-efficiently, than would otherwise be the case. Moreover, theimpetus towards equalization of money rates which it has givenhas been useful, not only to individual lenders and borrowers,but in the broader context of international monetary equilib-rium. Some observers have stressed certain adverse consequenceswhich the market may have and it would seem that theseobservations have their element of truth. From the standpointof official policy, however, it does not seem that the possibledangers of Euro-currency credit are of a different order fromthose of other movements of short-term funds. Maybe, becauseof its efficiency, the Euro-currency market has an exceptionalpotential for expansion which may create a special problem formonetary authorities in the future; but so far this does notseem to have been the case and on the whole it appears clearthat the market has served a useful purpose.Mr. Daane said that he and one or two others had challenged the favorableflavor of these conclusions. The second paper was largely descriptive,and concerned short-term arrangements between central banks and monetaryauthorities. The third paper dealt with laws and government regulationscovering monetary reserves and private uses of gold. One questionableaspect of this paper was an interpretation that the System would be unableto acquire an adequate stock of foreign currencies because of the re-quirement for a 25 per cent gold cover on Federal Reserve liabilities.One-half of a day also was taken for discussion of proposals for acomposite reserve unit. The French views were elaborated further, butthere was some change in focus by the French representatives, who nowclearly placed schemes of this sort in a more futuristic context, ratherthan describing them as something for today or tomorrow.Another meeting of the same exploratory type would be held at theend of February, Mr. Daane continued, to discuss (1) papers that the 2/11/64 -11-participating countries had been invited to submit on the issues that intheir judgment should be covered in the report to be presented to theFund; (2) a joint United States-United Kingdom paper on the role of re-serve currencies and the consequences for the international paymentssystem of partial or total displacement of reserve currencies; and (3) awide-ranging paper by Dr. Emminger of the German Federal Bank on thevarious radical reform proposals that had been advanced.A 10-day negotiating session was to be held in Washington duringApril, in preparation for which the U. S. would have to determine itsposition. This would be a Government position, to he developed by anintra-Governmental group--the so-called "ong-Range International Pay-ments Committee"--on which representatives of both the Board and the NewYork Bank sat in technical advisory capacities. The final U. S. Govern-ment position would be cleared at the top level of Government, in dis-cussions at which the System presumably would be represented by the Chairman.There would be another session, possibly in May, to translate the Aprilnegotiations into a preliminary report to the June meeting of Ministers.The final report, Mr. Daane said, was to be made at the Tokyo meetingof the Fund in September.Before this meeting there had been distributed to the members ofthe Committee a report from the Manager of the System Open Market Accountcovering open market operations in U. S. Government securities andbankers' acceptances for the period January 28 through February 10, 1964.A copy of this report has been placed in the files of the Committee. 2/11/64In supplementation of the written report, Mr. Stone commented asfollows:We have faced some rather interesting problems in conduct-ing open market operations recently. During the past few weeksthere has occurred the customary seasonal reduction in credit usethat is the other side of the seasonal rise in December. Thesharp seasonal increase in credit use in December of course upsetthe rough relationship that emerged earlier between free reservesof around $100 million on the one hand and the market tone andfeel sought by the Committee on the other. Given the seasonalspurt in credit use, that tone and feel, and that free reservelevel, could not occur together; they were no longer compatible.Since we could not maintain both the same feel and the same freereserve figures as earlier, we interpreted the directive asinstructing us to maintain a steady feel. This meant permittingthe free reserve figure to ride up to some extent while the useof credit was rising and was at its peak. Conducting operationswith precise symmetry during the past few weeks of seasonaldecline in credit use would have involved permitting the freereserve figure to ride down as far as necessary in order tomaintain the kind of market conditions that prevailed in Decemberand earlier. The difficulty with that approach, however, isthat, in my view, it might very well have involved the publica-tion of negative free reserve figures in one, or perhaps two,recent statement weeks. The Treasury, of course, has been in themarket almost continuously for the past five weeks, and to havepublished a net borrowed reserve figure at any time during thatperiod would have done injury td one or both of the majorfinancing operations in which the Treasury was engaged. Such aresult would hardly have been consistent with the maintenanceof an even keel. We therefore frequently found ourselves on atightrope during the recent period. A few more reserves mighton occasion have produced significantly easier market condi-tions; at the same time, however, nad somewhat fewer reservesbeen injected, we might have found ourselves publishing netborrowed reserves. The end result of our tightrope walking hasbeen a money market that was rather steadily firm but with asmaller margin of unsatisfied demands for reserves that had tobe met at the discount window. Thus, while the Federal fundsrate was 3-1/2 per cent each day, member bank borrowings haverecently averaged around $150 to $250 million, rather than thegeneral $300-$400 million range that had prevailed earlier. Thefree reserve figures, meanwhile, have been subject to rathersizable retroactive upward revisions.-12- 2/11/64During the past few days a closer relationship between themarket atmosphere and the reserve statistics appears to havebeen reasserted--as one would expect to happen as the seasonaldecline in credit use approaches an end.Turning briefly to the market, the Treasury's February re-funding operation, announced two days after the last meeting,was given a favorable but quite uneventful reception by themarket. Perhaps the most noteworthy feature of the financingwas the $1.8 billion of subscriptions the Treasury received forthe reopened 4 per cent notes of 1966. That issue was pricedat par to yield 4 per cent--only 4 basis points above the yieldon the 3-7/8 per cent notes, which mature a year earlier. Byproviding investors the alternative of the 1966 issue, theTreasury obtained some very inexpensive debt extension.The refunding took place against the background of a Treas-ury bond market that was moving up in price, partly in reflec-tion of Treasury comments concerning long rates over the restof the year. There also appears to have been some diversion offunds from corporate to Treasury bonds in view of the relativelynarrow spread that has developed between yields on theseobligations. The market is not altogether confident of currentprice levels, however; and yesterday, when a market letter dis-cussed the possibility of some move in monetary policy over thenext few weeks, there were signs of restiveness on the part ofsome dealers with sizable holdings of bonds acquired in therecent advance refunding.Following this statement, Mr. Stone indicated that current reserveprojections suggested that it might be appropriate to return the limita-tion on changes in the aggregate amount of U. S. Government securitiesheld in the System Open Market Account between meetings of the Committeeto $1 billion from the $1.5 billion that had recently prevailed.Mr. Mills said he would like to direct a broad question not somuch to Mr. Stone as to the Committee. Mr. Stone's discussion hadbrought out the fact that an even keel policy devoted to giving back-ground assistance to Treasury financing had been followed recently, aswas customary in similar situations. The presumption was that, if it-13- 2/11/64 -14-had not been for the Treasury financing, free reserves would have beenpermitted to fall to a much lower level--in fact, to a negative position--despite the fact that the short-term rate structure had not changedappreciably. The question in his mind was whether the loyalty of theCommittee and the System to the Treasury should outrank the allegianceowed to the general market, where over a protracted period there had been alevel of positive free reserves of quite substantial size. If, when theTreasury's need for assistance had passed, the Committee should proceedto shrink the level of reserves rather materially, it would be going inthe face of what the market could reasonably have expected to have beenthe trend in policy. If that should be the future course of events, itwas possible that the market would develop a cynicism and skepticismabout the good faith of the System that, instead of benefiting the Treas-ury, might harm their future financing programs.Mr. Stone commented that, as he had indicated in his statement,there had appeared to be a closer relationship over the past three orfour days between the market atmosphere, on the one hand, and the reservestatistics on the other. This was to be expected as the end of theseasonal decline in credit use approached. During the latter part ofJanuary, in particular, there had been a substantial decline in bankcredit. As bank loans were repaid, banks in turn repaid discounts andmade their excess reserves available in the Federal funds market, andthe market generally had an easier tone. 2/11/64 -15-Mr. Daane observed that there had been substantial upward revi-sions in prelininary free reserve figures in recent weeks, and Mr. Stonenoted that such revisions had occurred in every week since the first ofthe year.Mr. Mitchell commented that at the previous meeting of the Com-mittee there had been a discussion of the desirability of lettingsignals come through from the market, but he noted that there had beenonly a 3-point fluctuation in the bill rate since then.In response, Mr. Stone said that in the discussion at the previousmeeting he had tried to indicate the variety of reasons for the recentnarrow range of movements in the bill rate. One was that the market hadbeen conditioned to narrower movements. Beyond that, and perhaps asimportant collectively, were recent structural changes in the market. Forthese reasons the bill rate no longer provided the kind of signals itpreviously gave, and fluctuations probably would continue to be smallerthan in the past.However, Mr. Stone said, the Desk was not without sensitive signals,of which the performance of the Federal funds market was perhaps the mostsensitive. Recently, the Federal funds rate had stayed at or close tothe discount rate. But over the past year and a half, the Desk had developeda new network of contacts that disclosed what was happening with respectto the volume of flows behind the relatively fixed Federal funds rate.Through the course of each day the Desk had information on the depth ofbidding for Federal funds, and on the size of the supply of excess reserves 2/11/64 -6-available to the funds market; and it got confirmation of the impressionsobtained from this information after the close each day from figures onfunds transactions in the New York market that day. Figures on member bankborrowing which became accessible the next morning provided additionalconfirmation. The dealer lending rates posted by New York and out-of-townbanks, and evidence on the ease or difficulty encountered by dealers intheir efforts to get credit, also provided useful clues to market condi-tions. The indicators on which the Desk relied were more subtle thanpreviously, but nevertheless were sensitive and useful.Mr. Mitchell commented th.t such information might be very usefulto the Desk, but the problem remained of how the Desk could tell whatobjectives the Committee wanted it to pursue. Mr. Stone had implied thathis instructions were to keep the Federal funds rate at the discount rate,to keep the morey market firm, and to keep free reserves at about $100million. But these instructions were inconsistent by his own test, andhe had to choose among them. The Committee, Mr. Mitchell said, shouldstate what it wanted the Desk to do, and should not tell the AccountManager to make decisions for the Committee. Nor should the Desk usestandards and guides that the Committee was not posted on.Mr. Stone replied that the implication he had intended in hiscomment was that the market atmosphere and the free reserve figures pre-vailing before December were not compatible during December and Januarywhen there were sharp changes in the rate at which reserves were beingutilized, but that the earlier relationship was now being re-established. 2/11/64 -17-In his judgment, the Committee had made clear where it wanted the Desk toput the emphasis; the directive called for "maintaining about the sameconditions in the money market as have prevailed in recent weeks." Thisinstruction referred to market atmosphere.Mr. Mitchell said that in following the criterion of marketstability--and he agreed with Mr. Stone that that was about what theCommittee had voted to instruct the Desk to do--the Desk in effect hadgiven the Committee a small fluctuation in rate. If, because of struc-tural changes in the market, small fluctuations should be expected topersist, it seemed to him that the Committee needed current intelligenceon some of the measures available to the Desk.Mr. Daane commented that the measures in question, specifically,the rates on and flows of Federal funds, were reported every morning inthe 11 o'clock call. He personally decried interest rate rigidity, Mr.Daane continued, but since the last meeting he had talked with some lead-ing dealers and had read Mr. Stone's statements in the minutes of thatmeeting. He thought Mr. Stone's analysis was correct. A major factorholding the bill rate within a narrow range was the development of thecertificate of deposit market, and as long as that market functioned asat present, the bill rate probably would fluctuate within narrower limits.In another comment, Mr. Daane said he thought it incorrect topose the choice facing the Committee as between formulating policy interms of a rigid bill rate or in terms of a reserve target. Both were 2/11/64 -18-wrong; it was necessary for the Desk to have some flexibility in trying totranslate the feel of the Committee's wishes. The Desk had done that ina difficult period over the past two weeks.Mr. Bopp observed that Mr. Stone got a general notion of theCommittee's desires out of discussion around the table. The Committeemembers could not act as technicians, he said. The Account Manager hadto have a degree of flexibility, and the Committee had to trust in theAccount Manager's judgment.To Mr. Robertson's question of whether the Federal funds ratewas more sensitive than the bill rate, Mr. Stone replied that both wererelatively fixed. When these rates were moving, the rapidity of theirmovements was a useful indicator; but when they were not moving, thevolume of flows, the depth of demand, and the supplies of Federal fundsconstituted highly useful indicators. He added that the Desk was stilllearning how best to use information of these types.Mr. Balderston asked what the Desk would do if the Committee cameto the conclusion that the bill rate should fluctuate more than it hadrecently, and Mr. Stone replied that it would be extremely difficult toachieve that result. He noted that in the week before the last theAccount had bought over $1/2 billion of bills in the market, and the ratehad moved down only 1 or 2 basis points. About the only way the Systemcould get the bill rate to move significantly--even by 5 or 10 basispoints--would be to take some action indicating to the market that Systempolicy was changing, such as raising the discount rate or publishing zero 2/11/64 -19-or net borrowed reserve figures for two or three weeks in a row. Suchactions would change the level of rates, but would not necessarily resultin a larger amolitude of fluctuation. He would not want to statecategorically that gradual movements in rates were no longer possible,but it was true that large fluctuations were not likely.Mr. Daane commented that, as he interpreted Mr. Stone's position,bill rate fluctuations were likely to be narrower than they had been inearlier periods, but could be wider than they had been during the pastseveral weeks.Chairman Martin observed that he thought the problem under dis-cussion reflected the Committee's decision to deal in all sectors of themarket, thus departing from the so-called "bills only" policy. The Com-mittee had decided to change its policy in this regard for the sake ofthe advantages it thought would result. The Committee had discussed thematter for a long time, and had been aware cf the likely consequences ofits decision. In his judgment no purpose would be served by retracingthose steps.Mr. Stone said he would like to reiterate a point he had made atthe last meeting: the bill market was not faltering; it was a broad,active, strong market. In a recent go-around in which the Desk hadsolicited offers of Treasury bills, dealers had offered a total of $1,083million of bills at existing market quotations. There had been structuralchanges in the whole network of markets that had had the effect of reducingthe amplitude of rate changes, but the bill market itself was an excellent 2/11/64 -20-one. That was why it had been able to accommodate the pressures forstructural charges that had been impinging upon it.Mr. Hickman commented that in the recent period free reservefigures had fluctuated erratically, and the bill rate had been stickybecause of the structural changes Mr. Stone had mentioned. But figureson borrowed reserves had worked pretty well as an indicator in the pastmonth and a half; when they were high, there was a tight feeling in themarket. These figures might not always work as well as they had in thisperiod, but perhaps their usefulness was worth further study.Chairman Martin commented that there were various aspects to theidea of "depth, breadth, and resiliency." There was no doubt in hismind but that a "bills only" policy produced more depth, breadth, andresiliency in the market, particularly for longer term issues. But healso thought it would not be possible, under a "bills only" policy, toget results as effectively and efficiently in terms of managing the moneymarket as were obtainable under the Committee's present method of opera-tion.Mr. Deming observed that free reserve figures were a less perfectguide in January and December than at other times of the year. This waspartly because of imperfect seasonals, and partly because there was morechurning in the market at that time. This fact, coupled with the Treasuryfinancings this year, and with the series of upward revisions in the freereserve figures, had made free reserves a virtually useless primaryguide recently. 2/11/64Thereupon, upon motion duly made andseconded, and by unanimous vote, the openmarket transactions in Government securitiesand bankers' acceptances during the periodJanuary 28 through February 10, 1964, wereapproved, ratified, and confirmed.Chairman Martin then called for the staff economic and financialreports, supplementing the written reports that had been distributedprior to the meeting, copies of which have been placed in the files ofthe Committee.Mr. Noyes commented on economic conditions as follows:Early agreement on the tax bill now seems a virtual cer-tainty. The Treasury has successfully completed its currentfinancing program, We have in hand the results of the newMcGraw-Hill plant and equipment expenditure survey. A basicreappraisal of the appropriateness of the current posture ofmonetary policy in the light of these developments would seemto be indicated.With this in mind, I have reviewed the economic develop-ments of recent weeks as carefully as I could to see if Icould find in them any clues which would help evaluate thecurrent posture of policy, or suggest that either greater orlesser ease would help contribute to the achievement of thebroad goals of economic policy. My conclusion is that it ishard to fault monetary policy or the performance of the economyin either direction.It is still true, as we are constartly reminded, that unem-ployment remains in the unacceptably high 5-1/2 per cent range.But we did get a gain in seasonally adjusted employment inJanuary. In fact, most of the data that have become availableseem to have moved in the "right" direction. That is, figuresthat seemed unreasonably high or low have changed down and up,respectively. December retail sales are an example, on onehand, and capital expenditure plans on the other. Industrialproduction, which has lagged since the middle of last year,appears to be picking up a little. Bank credit expansion, toborrow an example from the financial area, moderated in Januaryafter a period of rather vigorous growth. In these few weeks,at any rate, most of the movements have not only been in thedirection, but very nearly of the magnitude that one might havehoped, had he specified his wishes in advance.-21- 2/11/64Perhaps a further word about: the 9 per cent increase in plantand equipment spending in 1964 reported in the McGraw-Hill surveyis in order in this connection. In my judgment, this is not analarmingly high figure, but one more nearly in line with otherobserved developments in the economy and estimates of the future.Sensibly interpreted, it should not result in any higher estimatesof business borrowing than were already contemplated. It is justabout consistent with the Council of Economic Advisers GNP pro.-jection for the year, and with the forecasts of many businesseconomists and financial analysts. Financial markets seem tohave interpreted it in this way.I find the subject of price developments most difficult,primarily because I have very little confidence in my ownjudgment in this area. I can plead in my defense, I think,that recent developments have been without precedent in thepost-war period and may well be unique in this century. We areabout to enter the fourth year of rather vigorous recovery andexpansion with wholesale prices still at about the same levelsthat prevailed in the preceding recession. Beyond this, profitmargins, far from being squeezed, seem to have improved a little,if anything. Thus, we find ourselves in a situation in whichthe experience of this generation, at least, is not of much helpto us. There are some good reasons why we might expect upwardprice pressures in the year ahead, but they are not very dif-ferent from the reasons why we might have expected such pricedevelopments in 1961, 1962, or 1963. It is hard to concludethat price movements of the last year, taken as a whole, or ofrecent weeks, can be fairly characterized as inflationary, noris there a basis for forecasting, with any more certainty thanone might have felt a year ago or two years ago, that a trulyinflationary situation will emerge in the period ahead. Con-ventional cyclical analysis would have called for rising unitcosts, impingement on profit margins and upward pressures onprices, in all but the very early stages of the recovery.Recent experience has not conformed to this pattern.The big difference this year is that the economy willreceive the additional stimulus of a large reduction in Federaltaxes. This may provide just the additional stimulus needed toachieve a somewhat higher level of resource utilization withoutgenerating inflationary pressures; or it may create an excessof aggregate demand, putting prices under strong upward pressure;or finally, it conceivably could fail in its intended pur-pose and add very little to either consumer purchases orbusiness spending.In the absence of the uncertainties surrounding the impactof the tax cut, one could make a very strong case, I think, that-22- 2/11/64the present posture of monetary policy is appropriate to theneeds of the domestic economy. In the light of these uncertain-ties, one can only conclude that it may not be, but that thenature and degree of change needed, if any, depends heavily onone's guess as to the timing and magnitude of the impact of thetax cut on aggregate demand. It takes more confidence than Ihave in our measurement of multipliers and accelerators topredict that impact with assurance.In the discussion following Mr. Noyes' statement, it was broughtout that the latest McGraw-Hill survey indicated a gradual upward move-ment in plant and equipment expenditures over the successive quartersof 1964.Mr. Holland made the following statement with regard to thefinancial situation:The developments that have occurred since the last meetingof this Committee confirm the calmer financial performance thathas followed the sharp year-end bulges in activity. Even thestock market, in advancing to new highs, has done so by meansof fairly orderly and moderate moves, considering the rapidlyimproving likelihood of an early tax cut. Long-term debt mar-kets have been firmer, with most rates declining slightly onbalance. Short-term rates have moved narrowly around thelevels reached late in December.Our latest figures show that bank loans and investmentsdeclined by about one-half billion dollars more than usual inJanuary, in sharp contrast to mucn stronger than seasonalincreases in the last two months of 1963. Most loan categoriesshowed only moderate January increases, seasonally adjusted,apart front a bulge in securities loans associated chiefly withTreasury financings. To make room for such loan expansion,banks returned to the position of being large net sellers ofGovernment securities, chiefly shorter terms. Meanwhile, theaverage money supply has been boosted by a large year-end run-up that has not yet been fully reversed; and by dint of aggres-sive merchandising efforts, especially in CDs, banks haveincreased their time deposit totals sharply.Other savings institutions also indicate sizable recentnet inflows, seasonally adjusted, most of which are quicklyreinvested in longer term earning assets. The result has beenan extension of the trend characteristic of most of this-23- 2/11/64 -24-cyclical upswing--private liquidity growing moderately fasterthan the growth in real GNP, combined with decreasing liquidityof the intermediary financial institutions. Studying thisdevelopmert in retrospect, I think the recent growth in theliquidity of the nonfinancial sector should not appear eithersurprising or unnatural, when one considers such influences asthe affluence of most of our society, the relative attractive-ness of liquid financial investment compared with other outletsfor funds, and the mounting totals of indebtedness to be ser-viced. But there is no gainsaying the fact that the largerliquid asset holdings in private hands provide the wherewithalfor substantial step-ups in spending if that inclination shoulddevelop. On the other hand, since most of this liquidity isin nonmoney form it must be converted into demand depositsand currency to be spent and the banks will have to come tothe Federal Reserve to cover the reserve needs thus generated.Furthermore, our financial institutions have moved into aposition in which they seem quite vulnerable to a significanttightening in reserve availability, and thus are likely to bea good deal speedier and sharper transmitters of monetary pres-sure to both private borrowers and investors. In effect, wehave sharper tools in hand, but a bigger job may be in prospect.The question is often asked, "How much has the FederalReserve contributed to this development?" The catalytic roleof the increase in Regulation Q ceilings is, I think, clearlyrecognized. Less clear is the part that: has been played bySystem actions to add to the. reserve base. Partly, I am sure,this is because of the varie:y of reserve measures at hand andthe often counterbalancing movements among them. I suppose atno time has this been more evident than over the six months orso since the last change in policy in July. Over this span,System open market operations have added net to nonborrowedreserves at only a 1.9 per cent annual rate, less than half therate of the preceding half-year, banks have borrowed a bitmore in reserves from the discount window, however, so totalreserves over this period are up at a 2,3 per cent rate. Loandemands and investment opportunities have been such as to leadbanks to mike more than proportionate use of these reserves,and therefore required reserves have moved up at a 3.2 annualrate. But two further factors have greatly helped banks toeconomize on their use of reserves to supply private creditand liquidity. One has been a large net transfer of depositsout of Government hands and into privace hands, in amount suf-ficient to free the equivalent of a 3.3 per cent annual rate ofaccretion in reserves behind private demand deposits. Thesecond has been the continued large public appetite for timedeposits. With the low applicable reserve requirement on thesedeposits, even the 17.5 per cent annual rate of increase in 2/11/64reserves needed to back time deposits since July absorbed onlyabout: half the total available reserve funds. As a result,total reserves required behind private time and demand depositscombined showed an increase of 7.0 per cent annual rate afterJuly 31. Accompanying the deposit expansion, total bank credithas grown by an 8.6 per cent annual rate.Some observers may regard the rates of expansion of bankcredit and private deposits over the past six months as greaterthan are likely to be desirable if long continued. But indicationsover the past four weeks suggest that market forces themselvesare eliciting a less vigorous bank expansion. Signs of this canbe seen in the more moderate bank loan demand, the return to sub-stantial bank divestment of securities, and the January see-sawin money supply totals.The chief exception to this rule appears to lie in heavyJanuary bank sales of CDs. These sales have been large, andmay even become larger for a time if banks endeavor to dealwith greater reserve pressures by trying to buy liabilitiesrather than liquidate assets. Such a problem could be knotty,but it may lend itself more to treatment by means of a selec-tive adjustment of the limitations of Regulation Q rather thanthe flexing of general monetary policy.However the general thrust of policy is determined overthe next few weeks and months, the question of operatinginstructions to the Desk is obviously a matter of continuingconce.rn. : am led to observe that System efforts to loosenmoney market rigidities would probably have to involve atoleration of larger swings in the "feel" of the market and inbank borrowing, as well as larger ranges of permitted fluctua-tion in free reserves and in money market interest rates. Inessence, this would mean System open market operations conductedwith a view to offsetting somewhat less of the daily, weekly,and monthly reserve and money market fluctuations than has beenusual.Mr. Daane asked whether Mr. Holland, by his final observation,meant to suggest a redefinition of "even keel," since an even keel periodhad been and still was in effect and probably would extend beyond theFebruary 17 payment date for the Treasury's refunding. Mr. Hollandreplied that he was abstracting from periods of Treasury financings. Mr.Ellis commented that this would imply that the difference in amplitudes of-25- 2/11/64fluctuation in market statistics between periods of even keel and otherperiods would be increased. Mr. Noyes remarked that if the market wereaccustomed to wider movements, there could be larger fluctuations duringeven keel periods; bill rates had moved up and down by 5-10 basis pointsin such period; in the past, although the movements had not been pre-dominantly in ,ne direction. Chairman Martin observed that the natureof policy after the even keel period also was a factor.Mr. Wod then read the following report, which had been preparedby Mr. Furth, on international developments and the U. S. balance ofpayments:The past two weeks have seen no substantial change inthe trend of the international economy. Tentative weeklydata indicate a deficit in U. S. international payments forthe first five weeks of the year of only $125 million, arate sligttly lower than that for the second half of 1963.Abroad, economic expansion continues, still combinedwith a payments surplus in.most countries. of continentalEurope. The payments difficulties of Italy appear to havebeen eased; in January, its deficit, adjusted for the repay-ment of bank debts incurred last year, has hardly exceededthe normal seasonal range.In 1963, the Common Market countries had an aggregatepayments surplus of $1-1/2 billion. Robert Marjolin, a VicePresident of the Common Market Commission, has predictedthat these countries would have an aggregate deficit in 1964.But this widely publicized statement should be interpretedas nothing more than an attempt at defeding the negativeEuropean policies under attack by U. S. critics--refusal toabandon agricultural protectionism; to grant adequate tariffconcessions in the imminent "Kennedy round" of trade negotia-tions; to bear a more equitable share of defense and aidburdens; and to modify traditional anti-inflationary monetarypolicies that tend to increase the inflow of foreign capitalinto Europe. It is heartening, however, to find that Germanyhas taken the first modest steps toward reducing its interest-rate level, by offering bonds at 5-5/8 per cent rather thanthe usual 6 per cent yield.-26- 2/11/64At home, data that became available last week show boththe composition of the U. S. payments deficit for 1963 and theway in which it was financed. These data make it possible toanalyze the impact of recent improvements in the U. S, paymentsbalance on the international liquidity position and thus on theinternational financial strength of the United States.The conventional calculation of the U. S. balance is asym-metrical in that it regards an increase of liquid claims offoreigners against U. S. residents as increasing the deficitbut does not regard an increase of liquid claims of U. S. resi-dents against foreigners as reducing the deficit. For someanalytical purposes it seems possible to take the position that--while there is in many cases a difference in the degree ofliquidity--there is no difference in principle between a Canadiandeposit with a U. S. bank and a U. S. deposit with a Canadianbank; between a German bank loan to a U. S. customer and a U. S,bank loan to a German customer; between Belgian acquisition ofU. S. bonds and U. S. acquisition of Belgian bonds; and betweenthe grant of U. S. assistance to a foreign nation and the receiptof repayments from the assisted country. There may be goodreasons for differentiating between these payments and receiptsfor the purpose of calculating changes in primary liquidity butthere seem to be no good reasons for doing so in calculatingchanges in the equally important secondary liquidity positionof the United States.If the U. S. payments deficit in recent years is adjustedin accordance with that view, the deficits for 1958, 1959, 1960,and 1962 remain disturbingly high. The deficit for 1961 isgreatly reduced and the deficit for 1963 virtually disappears,being reduced to $200 million.This computation is presented not to deprecate furthermeasures to eliminate the "conventional" deficit but to assessthe European complaints which assert that the United States hasbeen financing extravagant expenditures by forcing dollar claimson unwilling foreign holders. The data show that the size ofthe deficit as conventionally calculated need not be interpretedas reflecting U. S. debts incurred to finance U, S. military andeconomic aid to foreigners and the acquisition of equities abroadby U. S. investors; rather, it may be interpreted as arisingmainly because foreigners borrowed U. S, dollars, i.e., gave theUnited States claims on them, to the tune of $2-1/4 billion,taking in return half a billion in gold and roughly $2 billionin claims on the United States. Last year, in contrast to mostprevious years, the net borrower was not the United States; itwas the rest of the world.-27- The weakness of the argument that the United States hasbeen forcing dollar balances on unwilling holders may be demon-strated in another way. The. deficit for last year, conventionallycalculated, was $3 billion. Foreign authorities made debt prepay-ments of half a billion, took another half a billion in gold, asjust mentioned, and an additional half a billion in nonmarketablesecurities denominated in foreign currencies. This left $1-1/2billion to be financed by an increase in foreign dollar holdings.International institutions reduced their dollar holdings by $200million, but. foreign authorities increased theirs by $900 million,and foreign private bankers, merchants, and investors by $800million. About half of the $900 million increase in officialdollar holdings accrued to less developed countries, which pre-sumably were willing recipients of these assets. Similarly, thenet increase of $800 million in foreign private dollar holdingswas voluntary; the attitude of the international market towardthe dollar is shown by the fact that private foreigners reducedholdings of "covered" dollars by $200 million and increased hold-ings of "uncovered" dollars by $1 billion. Thus, if there wasany involuntary increase in foreign dollar holdings; it must havebeen confined to the increased in dollar holdings of the "Group ofTen," other than the United States, amounting to less than half abillion dollars. Clearly, the conversion of that amount intogold would have been tolerable, and might have been a small priceto pay for putting a stop to the complaints of some members ofthe Group about the sacrifices they are making in supporting theallegedly weak dollar and permitting it temporarily to remain aninternational reserve asset.If the tentative deficit figures of anuary and earlyFebruary are confirmed by the final reports, these complaintsmay soon be replaced by demands for larger outflows of dollars.In the meantime, the forthcoming U. S. drawing on the IMFmight well have adverse psychological repercussions. It there-fore is particularly important at this time to improve under-standing of monetary reality among public as well as privatemembers of the international financial community by pointing outthose recent developments in the U. S. payments deficit and itsfinancing which seem to have escaped their, and perhaps our own,attention.Chairman Martin then called for the usual go-around of commentsand views on economic and monetary policy beginning with Mr. Treiber,who commented as follows:2/11/64-28- 2/11/64This month marks three full years of business expansion.The business situation continues to be good, and business senti-ment is buoyant. The economy's present momentum, the absence ofspeculative inventory accumulation, and the stimulus of aprospective tax cut support the expectation of another year ofbusiness expansion.Since the last meeting of the Committee there have been nosignificant changes with respect to employment or prices. Theleveling off of bank credit expansion in January in contrast tolarge increases in preceding months does not necessarily indicateany significant change in the underlying trend of loan demad.But it does indicate the possibility of a slowdown in the rateof bank credit expansion. There has been little change in bankliquidity ratios. Broadly speaking, there is plenty of bankliquidity and nonbank liquidity.Over the last three years we have had relatively stableprices. More recently, however, price developments have beenmixed and industrial materials prices have risen moderately.Continuation of a reasonable degree of price stability cannot betaken for granted. Further gains in business activity will tendto reduce excess manufacturing capacity and make the economy morevulnerable to demand pressures. The trucking industry and theteamsters' union have agreed on a nationwide contract, with wageincreases and fringe benefits costing about 4 per cent a yearover the next three years. There are indications that otherlabor unions, such as the United Auto Workers, will press forsubstantial wage increases, citing large increases in productivityand large profits in their particular industries. While largewage increases in industries that have had above average in-creases in productivity may be absorbed without increases inprices in those industries, the large wage increases are likelyto foster corresponding wage increases elsewhere and to push upwages generally faster than the increase in over-all productivity.The consequence could be a cost-push on prices.Prospects for further general price stability depend onsuch underlying elements as world market trends in primaryproducts, and movements in the rate of capacity utilization,in productivity, and in wages and salaries. Price stabilityis required not only to protect the domestic purchasing powerof the dollar but also to strengthen the international competi-tiveness of the United States and thus improve our balance ofpayments.The most recent balance of payments figures are encouraging.Favorable factors in January included the absence of any newforeign security issues, a relatively small build up in liabilitiesto foreign branches of U, S. banks and to the foreign offices of-29- 2/11/64Canadian bank agencies, and the after effects on payments of theDecember jump in our export surplus. But one or two swallowsdon't make a summer. It remains to be seen to what extent thecurrent favorable situation will continue. Part of the improve-ment probably reflects a continuing gai in our internationalcompetitive position. Part reflects additional exports financedby the U. S. Government in one way or another. Can we keep downor reduce our unit costs at home? We can't rely on further priceincreases abroad to improve our competitive position. SomeEuropean countries recently have undertaken steps to curtail theirdomestic price rises. Such steps also could attract capital out-flows from the United States. Regardless of the effect of monetaryaction taken by foreign countries, we know that foreign securityissues in the United States are going to rise in the next few months.The balance of payments must continue tc have high priority in ourthinking.The current situation calls for caution. We have a domesticsituation which may well call for less ease in view of the betterbusiness prospects; we have possible dangers ahead if there arefurther rapid increases in bank credit and liquidity; we have signsof some upward movement in prices; and we have continuing uncer-tainty on the international side. But, in my opinion, these factorsdo not call for a change in policy today.The lack of immediate inflationary pressures, some indicationof a slowdown in the rate of credit expansion, the encouraging signswith respect to our balance of payments, and the attention beinggiven by the Congress to legislation in the economic area, particularlytaxes, counsel no change in Federal Reserve policy at this time.I do think, however, that it would be entirely consistent withthe current directive to have a slightly firmer tone in the moneymarket than we have had in the last couple of weeks. I am glad tosee that somewhat firmer conditions have in fact emerged in the lastfew days.I think there should be no change in the discount rate and thatthere should be no substantial change in the directive. The refer-ence in the directive to an imminent Treasury refunding should bedeleted.Mr. Ellis said that the New England economy was satisfactory butnot up to its full potential. Manufacturing output had risen a littlemore than seasonally in December. The purchasing agents survey suggestedstrengthening of output in January--there were more frequent reports of-30- 2/11/64 -31-increased orders to manufacturers in the region. The December employmentrecord was not good; there was a November to December decline in employ-ment in nondurable manufacturing industries which pulled totalmanufacturing employment down. Both groups continued down from a yearago. However, nonmanufacturing employment rose enough to hold totalemployment in the District slightly above the level of a year ago.New bank credit extended in December recovered sharply from thelow November figure to a level 10 per cent above a year ago. Bank loanswere strong in January despite a high average loan-deposit ratio. Districtbanks continued to find loans to foreign banks attractive, and they hadincreased the funds allocated to this purpose by about 68 per cent sinceJuly. They continued to bid for time certificates of deposit.The fact that the Treasury was in the midst of a refunding andhad just completed an advance refunding, Mr. Ellis said, suggested thatpolicy should not be changed materially and overtly immediately. He felt,however, that the Committee's deliberations should be devoted largely tounderlying issues and to the policy to be followed after the Treasuryoperations were completed. The present upward thrust in the economy cameduring a season of the year when some hesitation was common, and it was asource of satisfaction. At the same time, the evidence of the new McGraw-Hill survey on the rate at which capital expenditures would advance, andthe stimulation to be expected from the tax cut, suggested that it wasappropriate to remain alert to possible inflationary pressures from a 2/11/64 -32-superheated aggregate demand. It did not seem that the 5-1/2 per centunemployment rate would stand as an impediment to labor demands in theforthcoming wage negotiations, and it appeared likely to Mr. Ellis thatby next fall higher wage costs would be stimulating price advances.In this atmosphere, Mr. Ellis continued, monetary policy hadmade its contribution in full measure, and since July, perhaps in morethan full measure. The staff memorandum indicated that, since the dis-count rate action, reserves supporting private deposits had expanded ata rate of more than 7 per cent, and there had been an 8.6 per cent growthrate in total bank credit. While the staff analysis of the credit situationthis morning was good, it did not present an argument to the effect thata 7 per cent rate of reserve expansion was sustainable. While theexpansion rate varied from month to month, ar.d it was possible to hopethat it would slow down, the record since July did not suggest that thepresent degree of ease would result in more moderate and sustainableexpansion.Mr. Ellis' inclination was to seek a lessening in monetary easeto slow down the rate of monetary expansion, in view of the new stimulationto be provided by fiscal policy. Unfortunately, a problem was posed bythe 4 per cent Regulation Q ceiling. Credit expansion could be expectedto lift the short-term rate and bring the rate on CD's to the ceiling,thereby threatening a loss of as much as $10 billion of deposits unlessthe ceiling were lifted. The critical decision facing the Committee was 2/11/64 -33-whether it should provide reserves to whatever extent was necessary toprevent interest rate increases, or whether it should allow rates to riseand thus probably necessitate an increase in the Regulation Q limits.There might be negative reactions to an action raising interest ratesimmediately after tax legislation was enacted.For the moment, Mr. Ellis concluded, he favored no overt action.He would continue policy in its present posture and watch for signals,such as solid evidence that industrial prices were beginning to rise,that indicated the need for a change in posture. In the absence of suchsignals he would make no material change in policy. At the same time,he found it hard to believe that month after month the Committee couldcontinue to renew a directive which simply called for operations "with aview to maintaining about the same conditions in the money market as haveprevailed in recent weeks." There had been changes in recent weeks thatin his judgment did not conform to the basic objective of policy. Hewould hope that the Desk would be a little more aggressive in seeking asomewhat lower rate of reserve growth.Mr. Irons reported that business conditions in the EleventhDistrict had moved ahead quite satisfactorily during the past month.Industrial production in January was 7 per cent above the year-ago level,and oil production was up about 8 per cent. Construction contractawards were quite strong, particularly for residential construction.Retail trade figures were favorable. The unemployment rate in Texas 2/11/64 -34-(not seasonally adjusted) was around 4.6-4.8 per cent. New car regis-trations were high; apparently new cars were moving well in the majorcities for which data were available. The District picture was prettymuch the same as that in the nation, with some variations. Conditionswere strong but not surging, and there were few evidences of imbalanceat present.District banking figures for the last three weeks relativeto a year ago also were much like those for the nation, Mr. Ironscontinued. Loans, investments, and deposits were all down a bit. TheFederal funds picture had not changed much; purchases by District banksaveraged around $750-$800 million and sales about $350 million. Borrow-ings from the Reserve Bank were down somewhat.Nationally, Mr. Irons said, economic developments were favorable,the underpinning was strong, and the economy appeared to be well balanced.There was a high degree of liquidity. Bank credit recently had notexpanded as much as expected, but this was not damaging. Commodityprices were reasonably stable; although prices might be moving up insome areas, there was no strong evidence of inflationary pressures.The balance of payments problem was not solved, but there had beenimprovement recently.Mr. Irons felt that in view of current circumstances and uncer-tainties, the Committee should have clear and convincing reasons beforemaking any significant change in policy at this time. It would be amistake, he thought, to try to anticipate the effect of the tax bill 2/11/64 -35-when it was not. known what the final bill would be like nor what itsconsequences might be. Accordingly, he favored continuing the policythat had been followed in the past several weeks for the next 3 weeks,meanwhile watching developments closely.Mr. Hemmings reported that information available since the lastmeeting of the Committee indicated that employment rose in December inthe Twelfth District as a whole; moreover, the rate of increase surpassedthat for the nation, as it did during much of the latter part of 1963.Although practically all District States reg:.stered some gain in employ-ment in December, the bulk of the increase had been in the Pacific CoastStates.An unusually sharp dip in the labor .orce plus the modest gain inemployment caused the District unemployment rate to fall to 5.6 per centfrom 6.1 per cent in November, Mr. Hemmings said. This was the lowestrate since the spring of 1963, but it was slightly higher than the 5.5per cent figure of a year ago. Despite the December decline in the un-employment rate, another major labor market area--Tacoma, Washington-was added in December to the list of District labor areas classified ashaving substantial unemployment. There were now six such areas in theDistrict compared with four a year ago.Relatively few business data were available for January, Mr.Hemmings continued. In two instances, department store sales and steelproduction, the gains over a year ago had been less in the District thanin the nation. However, the demand for nonferrous metals had remained 2/11/64 -36-firm. Hedge buying against the possibility of a strike by mid-year atDistrict copper mines currently was a major factor in the strong demandfor that metal. A pickup in demand for lumber and plywood, particularlyfrom the California market, reportedly resulted in substantial priceincreases for virtually all dimension items as well as for plywoodsheathing in late January.In the financial area, total bank credit outstanding at Districtweekly reporting banks declined in the two-week period January 15-29nearly three times as much as in the corresponding weeks of 1963. Thereduction was about evenly divided between loans and investments. Thereduction in holdings of U. S. Governments in these two weeks by Districtbanks accounted for more than one-fourth of the total decrease for allweekly reporting banks in the nation.The decline in demand deposits adjusted at District weekly report-ing banks was substantially greater than in the corresponding weeks of1963, as it was nationally, Mr. Hemmings said. The increase in totaltime deposits was about the same in amount as in 1963 and accounted forone-third of the total increase for all weekly reporting banks in thenation.Daily average borrowings of reserve city banks in the Districtdropped off substantially in January, but the banks continued to havenegative free reserves. During the two statement weeks ending January29, banks in the District as a whole were net sellers of Federal funds. 2/11/64 -37-In both weeks, a large portion of the net sales was accounted for byone bank, as it reduced bill holdings and placed the proceeds in theFederal funds market.Mr. Deming observed that there had been no noteworthy newdevelopments in the Ninth District in the past two weeks. More recentestimates of personal income confirmed a fairly sharp drop in December,reflecting the fall in farm prices and the delay in farm marketings.In January, nonagricultural employment in Minnesota was up fairly strongly.There seemed to be no particularly serious maladjustments in the Districtat this time.One circumstance that seemed atypical and that was difficult tounderstand, Mr. Deming said, was the lack of exuberance in the Districtwith respect tc the business outlook. The "Minnesota Poll," a scientificpublic opinion poll conducted by Twin City newspapers, found sentimentnot significantly different from a year ago. The Reserve Bank's opinionsurvey, which was banker-business oriented, continued to show morepessimism than a year ago. The Bank's poll probably had some seasonal init, but the change in attitudes it indicated was quite marked.The District banking situation was about the same as in the nation.Officials at some of the larger city banks recently indicated that theyexpected a smaller increase in loan demand in 1964 than in 1963. Mr.Deming thought there probably was some downward bias in their estimates,but in any event the estimates did not support an expectation of a strongincrease in loan demand. Loan-deposit ratios at city banks in the District 2/11/64 -38-were about the same as in 1960, and up only a point in the last year.The trend at country banks was somewhat stronger.Mr. Deming said he agreed with the v:ews expressed by Mr. Treiber andMr. Irons. He favored no change in policy at this time, and no change inthe directive except for the elimination of the phrase on Treasury financ-ing. He would not change the discount rate.Mr. Scanlon said that the outlook for business activity in theSeventh District continued to be favorable. Retail sales had been at veryhigh levels in recent weeks and output in major industries had beenmaintained or had increased. Virtually all of the business forecastscoming to the attention of the Reserve Bank were optimistic.Mr. Scanlon observed that Mr. Treiber had mentioned wage contractnegotiations later this year. Signs of labor unrest were becoming evidentin some major Seventh District industries, he said, particularly in thecase of firms manufacturing motor vehicles and construction machinery.The Reserve Bank would be watching developments in these areas with greatinterest.As to policy, Mr. Scanlon believed the at the recent posture hadbeen satisfactory and that it should be continued until the next meetingof the Committee. He thought the directive could well stand, except forthe reference to "an imminent Treasury refunding." He would not favorchanging the discount rate at this time.Mr. Clay said that at this juncture it appeared appropriate tocontinue essentially the same monetary policy. Weighing the various 2/11/64 -39-developments in the domestic economy, the situation remained one thatcalled for sufficient reserve availability to permit member bank creditexpansion on a seasonally adjusted basis. The projected improvement inbusiness capital outlays was a much needed indication of expandingactivity, but at present it was part of the broader pattern of moderatelyincreasing economic activity that had prevailed for some time. Balanceof payments developments also appeared to permit a continuation of therecent monetary policy posture. Except for the deletion of the referenceto Treasury financing, the economic policy directive could be retainedin its present form. The discount rate should be left unchanged, Mr. Clayconcluded.Mr. Wayne observed that Fifth District business conditions re-mained substantially as reported two weeks ago: holding at generallyhigh levels. In manufacturing, the December gain in man-hours hadturned out to be larger than suggested by early data, and January reportsfrom industry sources indicated firm to strong, markets in metals, lumber,furniture, textiles, apparel, and chemicals. Construction employmentwas showing considerable resistance to the usual seasonal declines, andthe backlog of work probably was at an all-time high as a result of arecord volume of contract awards in the last five months of 1963. De-partment store sales improved sharply in the final two weeks of January.Bituminous coal production and shipments were somewhat lower in January,but foreign loadings were up and the general outlook remained favorable.Consumer loans at District weekly reporting banks displayed better than 2/11/64 -40-seasonal strength in January, but business and real estate loans weresomewhat weaker than usual. In the Federal Funds market District bankswere net sellers through the first three weeks of January but swung overto fairly heavy net purchases in the two weeks ended February 5.A few remarks on the cigarette market might be in order, Mr.Wayne said, although solid facts were scarce. Except where certain new,highly advertised filter brands were involved, District cigarette plantshad reduced the work week from a normal five days to four, and in a fewcases to three. Some liquidation of excess stocks in January and Februarywas a normal seasonal pattern. There was more to liquidate this year buthow much more was not yet known, so inventories would be checked week byweek for evidence to justify a return to full production. For one largeproducer this was already the fourth four-day week compared to only twosuch weeks required for last year's inventory adjustment. Meanwhile,reductions from year-ago levels in January State cigarette tax revenuesreportedly ranged in some areas as high as 15 or 20 per cent, but changesof this magnitude appeared exceptional and might be temporary.Nationally, Mr. Wayne continued, the flow of current informationindicated that the economy continued to register a moderate and firmlybased improvement. Two weeks ago he had noted a mixed behavior inprices, but since that time additional evidence pointed more toward pricestability. On several occasions during the current upswing there hadbeen patterns of price movements that looked like the beginning of aninflationary rise, but they had all collapsed after a few weeks. Such 2/11/64 -41-would seem to be the fate of this movement, although it was too soonto be certain.In the policy field, Mr. Wayne believed that conditions in themoney market for the past two weeks had been appropriate in view ofprevailing conditions. Seeing nothing in the current situation to suggestan urgent need for a change, he favored a continuation of present policyand a renewal of the current directive, with elimination of the referenceto Treasury financing. Obviously, Mr. Wayne said, he did not feel that achange in the discount rate would be in order.In a concluding remark, Mr., Wayne commended the Desk forhaving appropriately carried out, under difficult conditions, what ha.believed to have been the intent of the Committee.Mr. Mills observed that as he had followed the discussionaround the table, it seemed to him that the problem that the partic-ipants were attempting to contend with was one of leads and lags, withthe knowledge that it was necessary in monetary policy to lead againstanticipated future events, and with the further knowledge that there wasa lag between the time a policy was instituted and the time its impactproduced economic and financial results. His own feeling was that itwas still much too early to attempt to lead with monetary and credit policyagainst the possibility that the economy might overheat and at some unfore-seeable future date produce inflationary pressures. It would be preferableto delay any leading of the economy and to accept the very minimal riskthat delay at this time might provoke future problems. It was his strong 2/11/64belief that there would be ample time to take action against inflationarydevelopments it and when they become truly evident. Mr. Mills thoughtthat for the present there were good grounds for feeling that the economyneeded the stimulus of a reasonably relaxed credit policy that wouldpermit expansion along the lines recently experienced, as reflected inthe statistics.After these remarks, Mr. Mills presented the following state-ment:The nost significant event that has happened since theCommittee's last meeting is the upward revision in businessplans for new plant and equipment outlays revealed in a newMcGraw-Hill report. To the extent that these investment pro-grams represent enlarged plant capacity, rather than futuremodernization of existing capacity, they indicate expectationsof expanding market opportunities. In order for the economicmultiplier effects of these prospective additions to capitalinvestments to be fully realized in their own right as spendingstimulants and as sources of new savings, it is cruciallyimportant that adequate credit be available to finance theresultant enlargment of output through distributive channelsand on to final consumption. A more restrictive FederalReserve System monetary and credit policy could block anadvance into higher grounds of well-rounded economic activity.The current rule that an expansion in demand depositsadjusted and time deposits should be held to an annual rateof 3 per cent is tantamount to setting up an economic roadblock,in that mechanical adherence to the rule implicitly demands acurtailment of credit and a consequent contraction of demanddeposits whenever the 3 per cent expansion factor is violated.Slavish adherence to what is only a theoretical rule that hasbeen arbitrarily--if not arbitrarily and capriciously--chosenas an appropriate measure for bank credit expansion is boundto have deleterious economic effects, in that normal and naturalforces working toward economic advancement stand to be subjugatedto the confines of a theory whose empirical validity remains tobe proven. If the Committee persists in a belief that monetaryand credit policy should be guided and formulated accordingto a predetermined percentage factor for deposit expansion, it-42- 2/11/64would at least be preferable to raise the expansion factorfrom 3 per cent to 4 per cent and in that way dissipate theungrounded fear of unwarranted credit expansion that has beenexpressed whenever estimated required reserves have exceededthe 3 per cent guideline.I have argued continuously for the elimination of artifi-cial controls over interest rates and the abandonment of apegged United States Government securities market. Thearguments for a restoration of free market principles to thesecurities markets can be applied with equal cogency for a returnto the principles of dependence on the evolution of naturalfactors in the credit markets, rather than adherence to amechanistic theory of the supply of reserves, as the betterguideline on which to formulate monetary and credit policy.Mr. Robertson said he was pleased by the similarity of theconclusions that had been expressed around the table up to this point.He then made the following statement:We are hearing a good deal about "anticipations"--antici-pations of somewhat greater plant and equipment expenditures,anticipations of greater consumer spending, anticipations ofpossible inflationary price movements that might result--allin response to the tax cut. But it seems to me there is oneother "anticipation" that ought to be worrying this Committee--that is, how much of the stimulative effect of the tax cut hasalready been anticipated in our markets. To the extent that hashappened, any further upward push has been reduced, and theneed for any changes in monetary policy has been correspondinglydiminished. How shall we know how much of the tax cut has beenanticipated, and how much additional stimulus remains? The onlything we can do is to wait and see.In times like these, monetary policy should be based onfacts and events--not on pure guesses as to what the futureholds. And the facts of the moment are that unemployment isstill high, prices are generally stable, and the balance ofpayments has shown a marked improvement. To my mind, that addsup to a need for a continued stimulative monetary policy--con-tinued until enough adverse developments actually happen in ourmarkets to show that a change is needed.I know it is argued that if we wait until an inflationactually starts before we tighten monetary policy, it will betoo late. But I for one am not of that view. I think resolutetightening action on our part, whenever price increases becomegeneral and substantial, can brake that inflationary rise. We-43- 2/11/64might have to stand some rather sizable interest rate increasesin the process, but I think some people will be surprised athow quickly our financial institutions--with their already muchreduced liquidity positions--respond to a tightening policy.It is because I have confidence in the effectiveness of resolutetightening actions in such an environment that I am prepared toargue for our being resolute now in adhering to a stimulativepolicy.I would translate that objective into an instruction tothe Manager to continue reserve availability at least as ampleas in recent weeks, without worrying about incipient or modestmovements in market interest rates, so long as they remain orderly.Of course, the reference to Treasury financing should bedropped from the directive.Mr. Shepardson said that in his judgment the description of theeconomic situation given by the staff and others this morning, and theuncertainties as to the type of tax cut that would be enacted, the effectsit would have, and the extent to which it had already been anticipated,all argued for continuation of present policy during the ensuing 3-weekperiod.Mr. Mitchell said he would accept Mr. Irons' description andanalysis of the economic situation and his policy recommendation.Mr. Daane observed that he shared Mr. Noyes' lack of confidencein the precision of the estimates of the multiplier and accelerator effectsinvolved in the tax cut. He also was quite skeptical with regard to theimmediacy of the effect. In any event, he said, he agreed with those pre-ceding speakers who thought that policy should not be changed unless therewas a clear and compelling case for change on grounds either of the domes-tic economy or the balance of payments, and no such grounds were apparentat this time. Therefore, he would make no change in present policy, andwould resolve doubts on the side of watchful waiting. He would not change-44- 2/11/64the directive except to eliminate the reference to Treasury financing,and he would not favor a change in the discou.t rate.Mr. Daaae added that he did not think a change in the discountrate would help overcome the problem of rate rigidity but would simplychange the level of rates, because of the factors Mr. Stone had mentioned--structural changes and the market attitude that official actions wouldprevent rate fluctuations. The most practicable way to dissipate themarket view was for the Desk to continue to operate so as to permitreasonable flexibility of both rates and free reserves, and for theCommittee to maintain its willingness to permit such fluctuations, withina reasonable range, as reflections of market developments.Mr. Hickman said that the principal business news since the lastmeeting indicated that steel output increasec further in January and thatauto output and sales had substantially maintained the high levels ofDecember, after seasonal correction. These points had been surmisedtwo weeks ago, but were now matters of record. The industrial productionindex for January, when it became available, would probably show anothersmall upward change from the high December figure. This year there wasa notable absence of the kind of seasonal gloom about business that hadcome to be known as the "January jitters."The same general trends were apparent in Fourth District figures.All seasonally adjusted measures for the District continued at high levels;steel production, electric power output (closely geared to steel production),and building permits were higher in January than in late 1963. Adjusted-45- 2/11/64insured unemployment rates showed rather small, but fairly pervasive,changes for the better in most major labor market areas of the District.Department store sales dipped early in January but then improved, whilesales of automobiles, seasonally adjusted, stabilized at a high level inJanuary and early February, at a rate slightly below the record Decemberlevel. During the same period business loans at District reporting banksrose contraseasonally.Mr. Hickman observed that he continued to be concerned aboutthe possibility of price inflation, despite the fact that, thus far,this concern did not rest on substantial statistical evidence. Perhapsthe most important straw in the wind was the December figure for theindustrial comnonent of the wholesale price index, which showed an in-crease of three-tenths of one index point over November. In addition, thediffusion index of wholesale prices for 23 manufacturing industries hadbeen continuously above 50 per cent ever since July of last year, indi-cating that a majority of such prices had been moving upward month aftermonth. Further evidence of firming prices was provided by a survey re-cently made of industrial correspondents in the Fourth District. Admit-tedly, the survey showed persistent weakness in specific lines such aschemicals and electrical machinery and equipment, which were subject tosevere foreign competition. On the other hand, prices had increased ina number of areas, including ferrous and nonferrous metals, machinery otherthan electrical, and scattered other industries. What this boiled down to,it seemed to Mr. Hickman, was that upward price pressures were continuingto accumulate despite relatively flat index lines.-46- 2/11/64It appeared to him also that there was evidence of excessivemonetary expansion in the rate of growth of the money supply over thelast year and a half. If an outright price surge should materialize,Mr. Hickman said, the System might have difficulty in justifying itsrecent actions.Turning to developments in recent weeks, Mr. Hickman noted thatthe free reserve figures had been erratic and at times misleading. Bankborrowings, on the other hand, had remained around $175 million, indi-cating a fairly comfortable reserve position. Bill rates had remainednear the discount rate since the last meeting, confirming the impressionconveyed by the lower level of bank borrowings. Under the circumstances,he saw no clear reason for a change in the policy directive, except fordeletion of the reference to the Treasury refunding. With the advantageof hindsight, Mr. Hickman concluded, he felt that slightly less ease inthe past two weeks would have been better, and he suggested that the Com-mittee probe gently in that direction.Mr. Bopp said that latest readings of economic activity in theThird District indicated that business was fair. Unemployment claimscontinued to drop at a seasonal pace and remained at favorable levelsin comparison with previous years. Insured unemployment rates increasedin January in several areas, but the increases were not large. Help-wantedindexes, for Philadelphia and for the nation, increased in December forthe third consecutive month. Department store sales had been satisfactory.So far as District banking conditions were concerned, the relativelytight conditions prevailing in recent months had relaxed further. For the-47- 2/11/64 -48-week ending February 5, reserve city banks had a basic reserve surplus of$24.6 million. Reserve City banks were net sellers of Federal funds dur-ing the week.With the domestic economy and the payments accounts behaving asthey were, Mr. Bopp concluded, the present posture of policy seemed appro-priate. He would maintain the present position, make no change in thediscount rate, and, except for the reference to the Treasury refunding,retain the present directive.Mr. Bryan said that no Sixth District figures differed sufficientlyfrom national tendencies to be worthy of comment. As far as the nationalsituation was concerned, the factors he had in mind already had been dis-cussed. He agreed with those who believed that no overt change in policyshould be made now. In particular, he thought that the stimulative effectof a tax cut, which was being counted on so heavily by the American peopleshould not be offset by the System until such action was obviously nec-essary.Having indicated that he favored no overt change in policy, Mr.Bryan continued, he wanted to add that he agreed with the view that inthe long run the Committee could not sustain reserve expansion at therecent rate without creating difficulties, not merely from the monetarystandpoint but also from the standpoint of trying to combine marginal man-power with marginal resources. If the economic outlook was as good as hebelieved, the time would come when the Committee would have to permit re-serve availability to drift off to a lower level. 2/11/64 -49-Mr. Bryan added one final comment: He thought Mr. Mills hadcorrectly called attention to the fact that there was no one rate ofreserve expansion that ipso facto was the perfect rate.Mr. Shuford reported that economic activity in the Eighth Dis-trict had expanded only slightly in recent months, whereas in the earlypart of 1963 expansion had been at a substantial rate. Since late summer,employment and industrial use of electric power had fluctuated in a narrowrange. Spending, as indicated by department store sales and bank debits,had changed little. The early autumn rise in business loans had beenoffset by declines since October. On the other hand, bank deposits con-tinued to rise.The economic situation on the national level already had beencovered adequately this morning, Mr. Shuford said; it continued strong.As indicated, prices were remaining stable on the whole, with changesmixed. Upward pressures were developing in some areas at the wholesalelevel, and retail prices were continuing to move up.Mr. Shuford commented that he was becoming increasingly concernedabout the high rate of growth of reserves and money. He shared Mr. Bryan'sview that monetary expansion could not continue at the recent rate. Hewould like to see the rate of growth in reserves supporting private depositsdrop back considerably from the 7 per cent rate that had been experiencedin the period from August through January--perhaps to a rate of 3, 4, or5 per cent. He agreed that no specific rate of monetary growth could betaken as proper, but nevertheless he felt that at some time soon the 2/11/64 -50-Committee should move in the direction of lowering the recent growth rate.He shared the view that there were a number of factors, already discussed,that called for no change in policy today, and at present he favored nochange in policy, no change in the discount rate, and no change in thedirective except elimination of the reference to Treasury financing. Buthe thought the matter of the rate of increase in reserves and money wassomething that the Committee would need to continue to be aware of.Mr. Balderston said that whatever technical deficiencies themeasure might have, the best available index of unemployment was stillat 5.5 per cent--a higher level than anyone would want. If reduction ofunemployment were the only goal of monetary policy, it would be appropriateto continue the present degree of ease, perhaps even to increase it further.But there were other policy goals, despite the advice being offered bysome of the System's academic friends. He was referring especially tothose centering in the balance of payments, Mr. Balderston said. Suchmodest progress as had been made recently toward achieving equilibriumin the balance of payments might well suffer setbacks in the months ahead.Despite such consolation as the Committee might have received this morningfrom Mr. Furth's statement, the fact remained that by conventional meas-urement methods the progress made last year in reducing the deficitamounted to only 1/6 of the previous year's deficit, which was $3.6billion after adjustment for prepayments. In the year ahead the Committeehad to be prepared for shocks in several areas. First, the British wouldhave an election, and their elections often ware accompanied by some 2/11/64 -51-pressure on the pound about which the Committee could not be unconcerned.Secondly, noting the opposition of European countries to the receipt ofAmerican exports, especially of agricultural commodities, one might fearthat the U. S. would be defeated in its efforts to lower the barriers.Third, it was possible that wage negotiations this year, especially inthe auto industry, might cause the U. S. to lose the significant groundit had gained competitively during the year just past. If American costsshould rise faster than those of Europe, the ability of the U. S. tomaintain its healthy trade surplus would be diminished.It was not only the size of the trade surplus that counted, Mr.Balderston continued, but also the confidence that foreigners had in theability of the U. S. to make forward progress. In his judgment, that con-fidence had a great deal to do with their willingness to hold short-termclaims against the U. S. In brief, Mr. Balderston said, the Committeecould not afford to be lulled into a sense of security by the balance ofpayments figures of the last half year, because the improvement achievedmight turn out to be ephemeral. It had taken a long time to reach thepresent status, and the U. S. could lose ground this year unless it main-tained self-discipline.Not much change was evident in commodity prices, Mr. Balderstonremarked, except with respect to a few sensitive materials like tin. Butattention seemed to be focused on the prices of things, with the factoverlooked that the prices of services, and therefore the cost of living,had been pressing upward persistently.. The price of services, on the 2/11/64 -52-average, bad risen 12.6 per cent in the last five years, or about 2-1/2per cent per year, and in consequence the consumer price index had movedup from a 1957-59 base of 100 to a level of 107.6. While this was nota frightening rate of increase, a continual upward creep in the co;t ofservices was something the Committee could not afford to ignore.Mr. Balderston said he was willing to go along with the majoritythis morning in not favoring overt action at this time, but he hoped theCommittee could agree with Mr. Ellis and Mr. Hickman that some movementtoward less ea.e was prudent. In his judgment, the 7 per cent rate ofincrease since last July in reserves required against private deposits,if continued, would eventually lead to trouble. However, he shared Mr.Mills' point that adherence to any one percentage rate of growth was notdesirable.Chairman Martin said that he could concur in practically every-thing said this morning. He did want to make one comment with respect tothe Treasury financing. Even if the Committee had desired to move in thedirection of somewhat firmer conditions, he thought it had some obliga-tion to the Treasury in connection with the current financing. In hisjudgment, the Committee should lean over backward to avoid any inferencethat it had set up certain conditions and then pulled out the rug.The Chairman said he understood that the consensus today clearlywas for no change in policy at this time, no change in the discount rate,and no change in the directive other than deletion of the phrase, "and 2/11/64taking into account an imminent Treasury refunding", and there was noindication to the contrary.Thereupon, upon motion duly made andseconded, the Federal Reserve Bank of NewYork was authorized and directed, untilotherwise directed by the Committee, toexecute transactions in the System Accountin accordance with the following currenteconomic policy directive:It is the Federal Open Market Committee's current policyto accommodate moderate growth in bank credit, while maintain-ing conditions in the money market that would contribute tocontinued improvement in the capital account of the U.S. bal-ance of payments. This policy takes into consideration thefact that domestic economic activity is expanding further, al-though with a margin of underuti:.ized resources; and the facttht the balance of payments position is still adverse despitea tendency to reduced deficits. It also recognizes the in-creases in bank credit, money supply, and the reserve base ofrecent months.To implement this policy, System open market operationsshall be conducted with a view to maintaining about the sameconditions in the money market as have prevailed in recentweeks, while accommodating moderate expansion in aggregatebank reserves.Votes for this action: Messrs. Martin,Balderston, Bopp, Clay, Daane, Irons, Mitchell,Robertson, Scanlon, Shepardson, and Treiber.Votes against this action: None. Abstaining:Mr. Mills.Mr. Mills said he felt obliged, as at the previous meeting, toabstain. He was still unable to ascertain whether "no change in policy"referred to maintenance of a certain interest rate structure or wasintended to focus on the supply of reserves. He would like to followthe statistics from now until the next meeting to see what they might-53- 2/11/64indicate as to the actual implementation of policy, and to determinewhether he considered the implementation objectionable or acceptable.This analysis, he added, would be an international effort on his part.Upon motion duly made and seconded, andby unanimous vote, section 1 (a) of the con-tinuing authority directive was amended, inline with the earlier suggestion of theAccount Manager, to authorize the FederalReserve Bank of New York, to the extent nec-essary to carry out the current economicpolicy directive:(a) To buy or sell United States Government securitiesin the open market, from or o Government securities dealersand foreign and internationa. acccunts maintained at the Fed-eral Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, regular, or deferreddelivery basis, for the System Open Market Account at marketprices and, for such Account, to exchange maturing United StatesGovernment securities with the Treasury or allow them to maturewithout replacement; provided that the aggregate amount of suchsecurities held in such Account (including forward commitments,but not including such special short-term certificates of indebt-edness as may be purchased from the Treasury under paragraph 2hereof) shall not be increased or decreased by more thar $1billion during any period between meetirgs of the Committee.The Committee then discussed at some length the request thathad been made to Chairman Martin on January 22, 1964, by the Subcommitteeon Domestic Finance of the House Banking and Currency Committee, thatthe Subcommittee be furnished with the minutes of the Federal Open Mar-ket Committee for the years 1960-63, inclusive. There also was furtherdiscussion of the matter of making available the minutes of the Committeefor some historical period, a question that had been considered mostrecently at the meeting on December 3, 1963. No decisions were reached-54- 2/11/64 -55-on either subject, and it was agreed that the two matters would be ex-plored further at the next meeting of the Committee.It was agreed that the next meeting of the Federal Open MarketCommittee would be held on March 3, 1964.The meeting then adjourned.Secretary