 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Systemin Washington on Tuesday, December 15, 1964, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Martin, ChairmanBalderstonHickmanMillsMitchellRobertsonShepardsonShufordSwanWayneTreiber, Alterrate for Mr. HayesMessrs. Ellis, Bryan, Scanlon, and Deming, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Bopp, Clay, and Irons, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, KansasCity, and Dallas, respectivelyMr. Young, SecretaryMr. Sherman, Assistant SecretaryMr. Broida, Assistant SecretaryMr. Hackley, General CounselMessrs. Brill, Garvy, Holland, Jones, Koch,Mann, and Ratchford, Associate EconomistsMr. Stone, Manager, System Open Market AccountMr. Molony, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board ofGovernorsMr. Partee, Adviser, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Reynolds, Associate Adviser, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Axilrod, Chief, Government Finance Section,Division of Research and Statistics, Boardof GovernorsMiss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of theSecretary, Board of Governors 12/15/64 -2-Messrs. Sanford, Eastburn, Baughman, Parsons,Tow, and Green, Vice Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of New York,Philadelphia, Chicago, Minneapolis,Kansas City, and Dallas, respectivelyMessrs. Sternlight and Brandt, AssistantVice Presidents of the Federal ReserveBanks of New York and Atlanta, respectivelyMr. Eisenmenger, Director of Research, FederalReserve Bank of BostonUpon motion duly made and seconded,and by unanimous vote, the minutes of themeeting of the Federal Open Market Com-mittee held on November 24, 1964, wereapproved.Before this meeting there had been distributed to the membersof the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the System OpenMarket Account on foreign exchange market operations and on OpenMarket Account and Treasury operations in foreign currencies for theperiod December 1 through December 9, 1964, and a supplemental reportfor December 10 through 14, 1964. Copies of these reports have beenplaced in the files of the Committee.Supplementing the written repocts, Mr. Sanford said that thepublished gold stock figure would remain uncnanged this week.Treasury sales of gold to foreign central banks this month would belarger than first anticipated--some $125 million, as compared with$75 million reported at the Committee's December 1 meeting. TheSwiss National Bank, which bought $26 million last week in connectionwith the liquidation of the Treasury's and System's sterling-Swiss 12/15/64 -3-franc swaps of June 1963, purchased another $25 million yesterday(December 14) and was scheduled to purchase $25 million in January.In addition, the first of seven monthly $30 million sales of goldto Spain would occur this month. Barring off setting increases, theStabilization Fund's gold holdings would amount to no more than$30 million by year end.Eventual disclosure of renewed U.S. gold losses, Mr. Sanfordsaid, might reinforce the current uneasiness in various worldfinancial markets. It might also increase further the recentlystepped-up activity in the London gold market, where the fixingprice had advarced from $35.1002 to $35.1216, and where the goldpool reserve was being whittled away. The gold price was reducedslightly to $35.1179 yesterday, and to $35.1138 today, to counterthe market effect of a recommendation by the National PlanningAssociation for an increase in the price of gold.Turning to the foreign exchange market, Mr. Sanford reportedthat the pound sterling's performance had been less than robust.The market remained extremely cautious, and the good reaction thatfollowed the Bank of England's request last Tuesday (December 8)for credit restraint petered out quickly as pre-weekend selling onceagain took hold of the market. Over the first two weeks of Decemberas a whole the spot rate had drifted downward from $2.7931 to $2.7900or a trifle more. As a result, the Bank of England had intervened 12/15/64 -4-on various occasions either to support the rate or to bid it up,in the process losing some $280 million in spot operations so farthis month. In order to bolster its reserves, the Bank of Englandhad made net drawings since December 3 of $150 million under itsswap facility with the System, thus raising its System swapcommitments to $325 million. During the period beginning November30, the United Kingdom drew $1 billion from the International MonetaryFund and $155 million from other countries participating in the $3billion assistance package. Of the total, 180 million had been usedto bolster reserves and the balance to repay short-term credits.In the forward sterling market, Mr. Sanford continued, ratesalso had been under pressure with the discont for three-month for-ward sterling at one time having been slightly more than 3 per centper annum. Here also there had been official British interventionto firm the rate and thus to avoid any possible movement of coveredfunds out of London. Intervention in the fcrward market in parthad taker the form of swap operations, in which the Bank of Englandsimultaneously bought forward sterling and sold spot sterling(acquired spot dollars). Some $170 million of swap transactionshad been undertaken in this process, and by their very naturethese operations had served temporarily to offset reserve losses.However, at times they also had depressed the spot rate, and con-sequently had necessitated use of the alternative technique of 12/15/64 -5-outright purchases of forward sterling, which had amounted to some$120 million.With sterling having just weathered a strong attack,Mr. Sanford commented, it was going to take a certain amount oftime for the market to quiet down. Sterling was expected to im-prove after the year-end pressures had passed. The main problemwas one of leads and lags, and the immediate task of those whomanaged the market was to hold a determined, firm line until theleads and lags began to operate in favor of the United Kingdom.He understood that, at the week-end meeting at Basle, satisfactionwith the United Kingdom's short-run program had been expressed whileindications of the needed longer-range policies were awaited.As to the continental currencies, Mr. Sanford reported thatthe intake of dollars by the central banks so far in December hadbeen less than in November. Exchange rates: however, had remainedat or near the respective ceilings.Mr. Swan referred to Mr. Sanford's ,tatement that sterlingshould strengthen after the year end, and asked whether the expectedshifts in seasonal forces were of sufficient significance to causeimprovement. Mr. Sanford replied that there would be considerablepressure on sterling until the end of the year because of the needon the part of people holding pounds for funds to be used invarious kinds of overseas operations. Once those needs had been 12/15/64 -6-met the seasonal pressures would evaporate. This in itself wouldbe a matter of some consequence and would constitute an element ofstrength.Thereupon, upon motion duly madeand seconded, and by unanimous vote,the System open market transactions inforeign currencies during the periodDecember 1 through 14, 1964, wereapproved, ratified, and confirmed.Mr. Sanford recommended renewal for another 12 months ofthe $250 million standby swap arrangement with the Bank of Canada,which matured on December 28, 1964.Renewal of the swap arrangementwith Bank of Canada for a furtherperiod of 12 months, as recommendedby Mr. Sanford, was approved.Mr. Saaford then noted that two $150 million standby swaparrangements, with the Swiss National Bank and with the Bank forInternational Settlements, would mature on January 20, 1965. Thefacility with the BIS had been used tc the extent of $100 millionto absorb previous dollar accumulations of the Swiss National Bank.He recommended renewal of both of these arrangements for a furtherperiod of six months.Renewal of the swap arrangementwith the Swiss National Bank and theBank for International Settlements forfurther periods of six months, asrecommended by Mr. Sanford, was approved.Mr. Sanford then reported that two identical $10 millionequivalent three-month sterling-Dutch guilder swaps with the BIS, 12/15/64 -7-of which one was for System account and one for Treasury account,would mature for the first time on December 28. He did not atthis time envisage the possibility of acquiring in the market theNetherlands' guilders needed to liquidate these swaps, and con-sequently he thought they probably would have to be renewed. Also,it was probable that another System guilder commitment, a $5 millionequivalent drawing of guilders under the swap arrangement with theNetherlands Bank falling due January 18, 1965, would have to berenewed.Renewal of the System's sterling-guilder swap with the BIS, and of thedrawing on the swap with the NetherlandsBank, were noted without objection.Before this meeting there had been distributed to the membersof the Committee a report from the Manager of the System Open MarketAccount covering open market operations in U.S. Government securitiesand bankers' acceptances for the period Decenber 1 through December 14,1964. A copy of this report has been placed in the files of theCommittee.In supplementation of the written report, Mr. Stone commentedas follows:At the time the Committee last met the market hadundergone an orderly adjustment of prices and rates inthe wake of the dramatic events of the preceding week.As I reported then, rates on Treasury bills were in theneighborhood of 30 basis points above the levels of mid-November, while intermediate and long-term rates were upby around 12 and 5 basis points, respectively. 12/15/64The market was still in a highly uncertain state, however,and it seemed possible that a new round of expectationalrate increases might get underway. Given the Committee'sdecision on that day, and given also the prospectivewithdrawal of $0.5 billion of reserves the next daybecause of the Bank of England's repayment on its swapdrawing, we moved into the market in size on December 1and 2, making heavy purchases of Treasury bills andlesser purchases of coupon issues. By the close ofbusiness on December 2, the rate on three-month Treasurybills was 3.84 per cent, down 5 basis points from thehigh two days earlier, while prices of Treasury bondswere up by 1/4 point or more. Furthermore, by thattime the $65 million Pacific Gas and Electric issue,which investors had resisted the day before at 4.50per cent, had been sold out; and a $40 million utilityissue offered on the morning of December 2 at 4.49per cent had also been sold out by the close of tha:day.The improvement in market atmosphere that followedthe System's operations of December 1 and 2 was stronglyreinforced by the statement of the President regardingbank lending rates that appeared in the press the nextmorning, and by the action of the First National Bankof Boston, and later of other banks, in rescindingtheir posted increases in the prime rate. Prices ofbonds continued to move higher through much of theperiod as investment demand developed, and a number ofissues reached price levels that equalled or evenexceeded those prevailing before the British move.In the bill market, rates moved still lower after thePresident's statement, reaching the neighborhood of3.75 per cent as increased investment demand pressedagainst short supplies of many issues.With the close approach of the tax and dividenddates, however, rates turned around and moved back up.In the auction of December 7, a week ago yesterday,the average issuing rate for three- and six-monthbills turned out to be 3.82 and 3.94 per cent, butwith corporate and bank demand having diminished inthe face of the dividend and tax dates, dealersfound themselves, taking up record awards of almost$1.1 billion bills at rates that scaled all the wayup to 3.87 per cent for the three-month issue and3.97 per cent for the six-month bills. The unsold 12/15/64portion of these bills would, of course, have to be paidfor the following Thursday, which happened to be a heavycorporate dividend date--on which dealers would have torefinance up to $0.5 billion of securities coming backto them from corporations that had earlier acquired thesecurities under repurchase agreements. The market alsowould have to face another auction the following Monday(yesterday), and in addition would have to refinanceyet another $0.5 billion or thereabouts of securitiesdue to come back to them from corporate repurchaseagreements today, the tax date. It was against thisbackground of heavy seasonal pressures, and the prospectthat those pressures would have pushed bill rates wellinto the 3.90's (with consequent upward movements inintermediate and long rates), that we made repurchaseagreements at 3.85 per cent last Thursday. Even so,the average rate for three-month bills came out at3.86 in yesterday's auction, with some awards being madeat rates as high as 3.88 per cent.Once the current seasonal pressures have passed,investors may well regard these rate levels as quiteattractive; and, as I suggested at the last meeting,the market might settle down with the three-month billmoving around in the 3.80's.It is perhaps well that the Committee de-emphasizedfree reserves at the last meeting, since the figures wouldhave proved virtually uncontrollable even if we hadsought to conduct operations in terms of that statistic.The figures will very likely continue to behave erratically,since the estimation of reserve factors is always particularlydifficult over the four weeks that are ahead.As indicated in our written reports, Federal fundshave been readily available at the discount rate andfrequently below. Member bank borrowings have been onthe low s:de. The relatively low level of borrowings isattributable in part, as the staff's comment on question 6 1/indicates, to the level of the bill rate in relation to1/ The staff's prepared comments on certain questions consideredby the Committee at this meeting are given at a later pointin these minutes. 12/15/64the discount rate. Also important in this regard, however,is the somewhat higher level of aggregate free reserveslast week, the lower level of country bank excess reservesduring the past two weeks, and particularly the significantrecent improvement in the basic reserve position of theNew York banks. This improvement occurred in good partthrough a reduction in their loans to dealers as thelatter liquidated a substantial part of their billpositions in the days following November 23. The NewYork banks generally have been sellers of Federal fundsover the past two weeks instead of large buyers, asthey customarily are. This of course had reduced theneed for discount window accommodation both in New Yorkand elsewhere. How long it will be before these banks moveback into their usual basic deficiency position remainsto be seen. But activity at the disccunt window islikely to remain relatively light until they do; andeven then, for the reason the staff points to in itsanswer to question 6, borrowings may not move to theirformer levels.Treasury financing prospects for the next severalweeks include the necessitous borrowing of perhaps$1 billion to $2 billion cash and the active possibilityof an advance refunding operation. As matters nowappear, the Treasury is likely to raise cash throughthe sale of additional June tax anticipation bills,probably announcing this operation just before yearend--at the same time that they may announce anadvance refunding. The sale of additional bills wouldtend to offset any downward tendency in bill rates thatmight result from the depletion in supply of short-termcoupon issues through the advance refunding. It alsoappears likely that the Treasury ..ill raise some additionalcash after the turn of the year by continuing to sell$2.2 billion of three- and six-month bills each week asagainst weekly maturities of $2.1 billion.Mr. Mills remarked that in following the operations of theAccount and in interpreting market developments in the period sincethe Committee's previous meeting, at which he had not been present,it seemed to him that operations had been aimed largely at producingan interest rate structure that would instill confidence in the-10- 12/15/64 -11-financial community. This course had been followed despite the factthat there typically was a tightening of interest rates in December.The question in his mind was whether by interfering to prevent sucha tightening this year the Committee was creating an unnaturalsituation that would require correction at some early date. Byand large, and within reason, some tightening of interest rates andsome effort to limit the reserve supply would have been preferable,in his opinion, to supplying reserves at a rate that created asurplus and that led to almost a sloppy market. In addition, asthe new year began, if economic developments were as had beenindicated, a more drastic reversal of operations might be requiredthan would have been the case if seasonal developments had beenallowed to produce their usual effects.Mr. Stone responded that the instructions of the Committeeat the previous meeting, as he understood them, were to focus oninterest rates, particularly the bill rate, in the conduct ofoperation; and to keep the rate on three-month Treasury billsroughly in the 3.75-3.90 per cent range. As he had indicated inhis statement, shortly after that meeting the bill rate moveddown to about 3.75 per cent, but it then rose from that level inresponse to seasonal pressures. Accordingly, there had been somereflection of seasonal forces in the market.Mr. Mills observed that bill rates would have been higherthan they were if free reserves had been lower. As he read the 12/15/64 -12-directive issued at the previous meeting--and this brought up thewhole question of the Committee's directives--it called foraccommodating moderate growth in reserves and for maintainingcertain conditions of stability in the money market, but it madeno direct mention of a target for bill rates such as might havecome up in casual discussion around the table.Mr. Stone replied that he had operated on the under-standing that it was the Committee's intent that a bill ratetarget should be used. With respect to the suggestion thatunnatural market conditions might have been created by theDesk's operations, Mr. Stone noted that, as mentioned in hisstatement, he had suggested at the previous meeting that thethree-month bill rate probably would settle down in the 3.80per cent range after the period of seasonal pressures had passedif the Committee made no substantial change in its reserveposture. The bill rate was in that range now, and in hisjudgment its current level was quite compat:ble with the kindof reserve posture the Committee had been maintaining recently.On the whole, he thought there was nothing artificial in currentmoney market conditions.Nor did he think conditions in the long-term market wereartificial, Mr. Stone continued. The market was confident thatthe economy would continue to generate a substantial flow of 12/15/64 -13-savings and that the demand for long-term funds in 1965 was notlikely to be substantially greater than in 1964 and might possiblybe smaller. The expectation for long-term interest rates was that,if anything, they were likely to go down in 1965.Recently, Mr. Stone said, the Federal funds rate frequentlyhad been below the discount rate. This was closely related to thelow level of borrowings, and both of these developments, in turn,were partly a consequence of the level of the bill rate relativeto the discount rate. Also, the New York banks, which typicallyborrowed $400 to $600 million net every day, had a basic reserveexcess and had been net sellers of Federal funds in the pasttwo weeks. Ccmmercial banks in New York, as well as some otherbanks, had worked themselves into a basic reserve surplus positionin order to be able to accommodate the expected heavy demands forfunds over the tax and dividend dates. In other recent yearsthey had done :his by selling assets, beginning about two weeksin advance of those dates. This year, however, they did not haveto sell assets because they lost dealer loans as dealers workeddown their trading positions. Dealers had sold a tremendousvolume of bills to the private sector recently, in addition totheir sales to the System Account.In reply to a question by Mr. Swan, Mr. Stone said thissituation had been reversed in the past few days as dealers re-acquired inventories in recent auctions and borrowed from theNew York banks in considerable volume. 12/15/64Thereupon, upon motion duly madeand seconded, and by unanimous vote,the open market transactions in Govern-ment securities and bankers' acceptancesduring the period December 1 through 14,1964, were approved, ratified, and con-firmed.Chairman Martin then called for the staff economic andfinancial reports, supplementing the writter reports that had beendistributed prior to the meeting, copies of which have been placedin the files of the Committee.Mr. Koch presented the following statement on economicconditions:Domestic economic activity has rebounded sharplyfrom the effects of the work stoppages in the auto industry.The November industrial production index was almost afull point above the record September high, despite someimpact of the Ford strike early in the month. The indexis no doubt showing a further rise in December and isabout 7 per cent above a year ago. The manufacturingworkweek rose to 40.9 hours in November, due in part toheavy overtime in autos, but also reflecting some furtherincreases in overtime in quite a few other industries,particularly in the durable goods area. Because of thetemporary curtailment of activity in October, the fourth-quarter increase in GNP is likely to be only about half aslarge as in earlier quarters this year, but chances arevery good that this shortfall will be made up in the firstquarter of the new year.One dramatic aspect of recent demand developmentshas been the step-up in inventory accumulation bymanufacturers. Stocks of manufacturers rose $600 millionin the third quarter, following increases that averagedonly $125 million per quarter in the first half of 1964.They are anticipated to increase $1.2 billion in thefourth quarter. The greater accumulation since midyear-14- 12/15/64has been due in large part to resumption of accumulationof inventories of steel and other ma:erials, althoughaccumulation of goods in process and finished goods hasalso stepped up since midyear.Manufacturers anticipate a further rise in stocksof $600 million in the first quarter of 1965. In viewinglonger-run prospects for inventory accumulation, twopoints are relevant: first, much of the current step-upin manufacturers' inventory demands represents a hedgeagainst a possible steel strike; and, second, businesseshave now had several years of satisfactory experience inoperating with relatively low stock-sales ratios and mostof then still report that their present ratios are "aboutright."Turning to the price area, the weekly wholesaleindustrial price figures in November and early Decembersuggest a continuation of the October rise, although atless than half the rate. The rise continues to be focusedin the nonferrous metals area, with price changes outsidethis area continuing to be selective and largely offsettingin their effects on the general price indexes.Prospects are improving, moreover, that pressureswill abate in some nonferrous markets. In copper, forexample, world production has been recovering from lastsummer's strikes and current output is higher than lastspring when inventories apparently were being accumulated.The gap between tin production and consumption is beingfilled by increased sales from the stockpile, and tinprices have dropped sharply from the very high levelsreached in October.On the labor front, the decline in the over-allunemployment rate from 5,2 to 5.0 per cent from Octoberto November cannot be considered highly significant. Therate remains in the relatively narrow range in which ithas varied since late spring, as increases in employmenthave only matched increases in the labor force. Unitlabor costs in manufacturing rose in September andOctober, but this movement, like those in many otherstatistics recently, was no doubt materially affectedby the work stoppages in the auto industry. In November,unit labor costs may have returned to about their Septemberlevel.Although labor unrest appears to be increasing anddock and rail strikes are threatening, concern aboutthe spreading of wage increases continues to focus on the-15- 12/15/64steel industry. Here there are some factors suggesting alarge settlement and others suggesting a more modest one.Those suggesting a large settlement include the strugglefor political power within the union, the relatively largeearlier auto settlement, the high current demands for steel,and the small settlements in steel in 1962 and 1963,settlements that consisted only of fringe benefits. Factorssuggesting the possibility of a more moderate settlementare the changed attitudes of both management and labor inthe industry regarding the likelihood of being able topass on cost and price increases to buyers in the current com-petitive market environment, and the importance to theadministration and the general public of a settlement nearthe guidepost and without a strike.Settlements in steel as well as in other industrieshave appeared in recent years to be strongly influencedby longer-term competitive aspects and by concern overthe threat of substitution from other sources of supply,both domestic and foreign. Sales of Japanese steel inthe U.S. market, for example, are still on the rise,and Japanese producers are likely to intensify ratherthan diminish their sales efforts here in the monthsahead. Union demands in collective bargaining haveemphasized increases in fringe benefits rather than inmoney wages, reflecting a heightened desire to protectjob security and future income rather than just currentincome. On balance, these developments suggest a fairlygenerous steel settlement but one far less costly thanthe disruptive ones in the mid- and late-1950s.In sum, economic activity in the near-term futureis likely to be brisk, as auto restocking and precautionarysteel buying continue and as business capital expendituresrise furtner. The current vigorous expansion stillposes the potential threat of a destabilizing thruston the upside, but this threat may well lessen sharplywith a steel settlement, unless it is a large one.Prospective declines in auto production following thecurrent stock rebuilding and in steel production followingthe wage settlement could well lead to a slowdown in theexpansion, although at this juncture one cannot see whatnew elements may have entered the picture by then.The most common current economic forecast is that1965 will be a prosperous year, but not good enough toabsorb the increase in the labor force, expected to belarger than in 1964, let alone reduce the present number-16- 12/15/64 -17-of unemplcyed unless more stimulus than is currentlyanticipated comes from either the private sectors of theeconomy or the Government. With this possible outlookin mind and recognizing the inevitable lags in the im-pacts of monetary policy, domestic ecoromic considerationsstill seen to me to call for a continuation of the existingdegree of credit availability and of approximately currentcosts of Longer-term credit and capital.Chairman Martin noted that a memorandum dated December 7,1964, entitled "Proposal for Obtaining Financial Statements from NonbankDealers in U. S. Government Securities," had been addressed to theCommittee by the Steering Group of the Government Securities MarketStudy, of which Mr. Koch was a member. (A copy of this memorandum,together with certain attachments, has been placed in the files ofthe Committee. The Chairman suggested that the Committee discussthis memorandum before proceeding to the report on financialdevelopments, and he invited Mr. Koch to comment.Mr. Koch observed that the proposal, which was summarizedin the first five pages of the memorandum, grew out of the 1959-1960 study of :he Government securities market by the Treasury andthe Federal Reserve that followed the 1958 episode of speculativeboom and collapse. The recommendation of that study for collectionof better information on dealer positions, transactions, andfinancing already had been implemented. The Steering Group thenhad turned to a second recommendation, that more uniform balancesheet and income statements be obtained from nonbank dealers, and it 12/15/64 -18-had developed the proposal for financial statements described inthe memo andum.Mr. Koch described the proposal as a first and exploratorystep in meeting the problem. He said the Steering Group hadencountered considerable difficulty in taking even this firststep; that it hoped to learn more about the problem as experienceunder the new program was accumulated; and that this might wellresult in further recommendations.The proposed financial statements would serve severalobjectives, Mr Koch said. First, it was hoped that iproved andmore uniform financial statements would encourage sounder financialreporting and practices by dealers. Their financial reports atpresent generally were skeletal and disparate in nature. It wasdifficult to achieve uniformity in statements because of the widedifferences in the scope of activities in which the variousdealers engaged and because some dealer organizations werepartnerships and some were corporations.Good accounting practices were particularly important inthis industry, Mr. Koch observed, because dealers typicallyoperated with small capital and narrow equity margins. At thesame time, the smooth and sound functioning of the Governmentsecurities market was vital both to the financing operations ofthe Treasury and to the open market operations of the Federal 12/15/64 -19-Reserve. Although great reliance in ensuring the financialsolvency of dealers still would have to be placed on the integrityof the dealers themselves, the Steering Group felt that thedevelopment of uniform financial reports could play an importantcontributory role. Initially, the proposal called for annualstatements, but later the statements might be requested morefrequently. it might also be appropriate to institute surpriseaudits at some future date.A second purpose of the program was to provide betteraggregate statistical information of a financial-statement typefor the industry. There had been many requests for such informaticnfrom interested groups, including committees of Congress. Finally,some dealers have complained recently that various System operatiorsand Treasury debt management techniques had been impairing thefunctioning of the market and their ability to earn adequate profits.Better information on dealer capital, incomes, and expenses wouldbe useful in evaluating such complaints.Mr. Koch observed that the program proposed had been dis-cussed with the Secretary of the Treasury, and Mr. Dillon had madetwo suggestions. First, he thought it would be desirable to havea letter to the dealers announcing the inauguration of the programfrom Chairman Martin and himself as well as one from Mr. Hayes asproposed in the memorandum. Secondly, he strongly urged that the 12/15/64 -20-program be started with financial reports as of the end of thecurrent calendar year.In response to an invitation to comment by Chairman Martin,Mr. Stone said that he fully endorsed the proposal. He observedthat dealers were agreeing to supply the information requestedwith a certain amount of reluctance, but he would expect thisreluctance to be overcome once the program was under way and thedealers could see its value.In the ensuing discussion Mr. Robertson remarked that hethought the proposal was a real step forward. Mr. Mitchell com-mented that while he did not disapprove of the program proposedhe considered it inadequate for the purpose and regretted thatit was not more responsive to the problem.Thereupon, the recommendations ofthe Steering Group for obtaining financialstatements from nonbank Governmentsecurity dealers, as set forth in thememorandum of December 7, 1964, wereapproved.Secretary's Note: The following letterwas sent to nonbank dealers in Governmentsecurities over the signatures ofSecretary Dillon and Chairman Martin onDecember 24, 1964:Dear Mr.The Treasury-Federal Reserve program for improvingthe available information on the Government securitiesmarket has now been underway for nearly five years.You will recall that in January 1960 Chairman Martinand then Secretary of the Treasury Anderson wrote you 12/15/64to initiate a program for "collection of data coveringtransactions volume, dealer positions and borrowing,including financing under repurchase agreements, andbalance sheet and income statement information."The data on transactions volume, oealer positionsand dealer borrowing collected since 1960 have provedto be of real value to the Treasury and the FederalReserve, as well as to interested students. We wantto express our appreciation for your cooperation andpublic-spiritedness in providing these data which haveproved so useful.Now the time has come to move ahead on the secondstage of the information program, the collection ofnonbank dealer financial reports, including bothbalance sheets and income statements. We expect thatthis additional information, to be collected on aconfidential basis but with the prospect of publicationin consolidated summary form after some reasonabletrial period, will be of significant benefit to us inappraising developments in the Government securitiesmarket. The accompanying letter from Mr. Hayes andits attachments give the details of the projectedprogram and our staffs will of course be availableto work with you in implementing it.Chairman Martin observed that it mi;,ht be desirable toinstitute meetings with the dealers early next year to give themanother opportunity to discuss their problems directly with Systempeople.Mr. Partee then made the following statement concerningfinancial developments:Domestic financial markets appear now to havesettled down in the wake of the official rate actionsof November 23. Sensitive yields have declined inboth short- and long-term markets, and in the lattercase are back to about where they were just before the-21- 12/15/64discount rate increase. Partly this readjustment hasbeen in response to official pronouncements, to marketestimates of Federal Reserve policy, and to the failureof any prime bank rate increase to carry through. Butthe resilience of long-term markets also reflects basicsupply-demand relationships, including particularlythe absence of any significant current or prospectiverise in financing volume.In shorter-term markets, despite some backing downin the past two weeks, yields remain appreciably abovethe November 20 level--generally 15 to 20 basis pointshigher. As a result, the yield curve is even flatterthan before; taking bills on an investment yield basis,the Government list is essentially flat in yield from6 months on out at about 4.10 per cent. The questionis, how sustainable is such a yield curve?Under present circumstances, it seems to me thatthere is a good chance that long-term yields willhold where they are, or even drift lower, despitethe upward adjustment we have had in short-term rates.Basic to this proposition is the expectation thataggregate long-term financing demands will notrise in the period ahead. There could well be someincrease in corporate financing as capital expenditurescontinue upward, although no such tendency is yetevidenced by the new issue calendar, which isseasonally slack over the turn of the year. But thenet expansion of mortgage debt has already fallenoff somewhat this year from its late 1963 peak, anda further decline is to be expected as the drop inhousing starts last spring is reflected more fullyin the mortgage figures.The flow of savings available for long-terminvestment has continued large throughout thisexpansion, and most market observers expect suchflows to remain high in the period ahead. Theprospects for this have been enhanced by the RegulationQ action, which both improves the ability of banks tocompete for time deposits and savings funds andvirtually eliminates any possibility of a move towardlower rates by savings institutions generally at theturn of the year. The potential for larger savingsflows, especially to banks, appears to underlie therecent marked decline in municipal yields to thelowest levels since the spring of 1963. Any developing-22- 12/15/64slack between supplies of and demands for longer-term funds, of course, could be taken up by Treasurydebt-lengthening; a decision to undertake an advancerefunding in January would present a near-term testof the absorptive capacity of the capital markets.The sustainability of the present flat yieldcurve is also enhanced by uncertainties about thecourse of the economy in 1965. If we are at orclose to a cyclical peak in interest rates, borrowerswould not want to accelerate their long-term financingneeds, nor would lenders want to do much shortening oftheir investment portfolios.Growing investor uncertainty about the strengthof economic prospects may be indicated by the recentbehavior of the stock market, which has declined3-1/2 per cent over the last three weeks. Internationalfinancial uncertainties and the increase in officialrates here and abroad may have triggered the decline,but a more basic factor probably is the growing aware-ness that corporate profits appear to be leveling out.Manufacturers' profit margins, in fact, have incheddownward quarter by quarter this year on a seasonallyadjusted basis, although there will be fillip to after-tax earnings with the second two-point cut in thecorporate tax rate in January. This has long beendiscounted in the market, however, and the newindications of an essentially flat earnings perform-ance, despite a possibile uptick stemming from near-term inventory accumulation, may well not be bullishenough to sustain the relatively high price-earningsratio of 19 reached in mid-November.Turning to recent credit market developments,the figures now confirm that total bank creditexpansion in November was exceptionally large, bothon a daily average and month-end basis. Much ofthe unusual size of the increase was accounted forby Treasury financings, which had the effect ofboosting both Government portfolios and securityloans more than seasonally toward month-end.Business lending also picked up, but only to apace about in line with the year as a whole, andother loans, except for those to security dealers,continued to expand at the rate of recent months.In the first two weeks of December, judging fromreports for New York City, business loan demands-23- 12/15/64strengthened significantly, partly due to hedging againstpossible prime rate action, but the rise in total creditwas considerably less than in other recent years.Most of the increase in lendable funds in Novemberresulted from a contraseasonal expansion in Treasurybalances, and also from an acceleration in time andsavings deposit growth. The former reflected theTreasury cash financing, unusual for November, andthe latter a continued enlargement of savings inflows,related it. large part to the shortfall in new carsales in both October and November. Demand depositsrose only moderately on balance, expanding in the firsthalf and contracting in the second, and the money supplyincreased $500 million, at the lower end of the $500-$800 million range of increases over the past 4 months.Very tentative indications are that there was only amoderate further rise in the first half of December.The November expansion brought the growth rate of themoney supply for the year to date to 4.2 per cent,with currency up 6 per cent and demand deposits3.8 per cent. (The last figure is slightly revisedfrom the 3.5 per cent reported in element 3 of thetrial directive.)Meanwhile, the banking system has reacted to thehigher discount rate in a predictable manner. In thefirst two weeks of December, both exce.s reserves andborrowings declined from the averages of earlier two-week settlement periods, with a little larger declinein the latter contributing to somewhat higher averagefree reserves. Banks have been pressing to utilizeexcess reserves, and the flow of Federal funds hasbeen large, often at rates below 4 per cent. Solong as rates on both bills and Federal funds remainwell below the discount rate, banks will tend to makemarginal reserve adjustments through these marketsand borrowings will be restricted. This, of course,means that a higher free reserve figure on averageis likely to continue to be associated with currentmarket rates. Maintenance of these rates, in turn,depends basically on the availability of nonborrowedreserves as required to support current bank creditexpansion.In summary, there has been an orderly, and onthe whole balanced, adjustment to the Novemberofficial rate actions. The yield structure which-24- 12/15/64has evolved seems sustainable in the current context,although the adjustments in investor attitudes and ininitial allocations of funds are still provisional andtentative. Expansion in bank credit and in money appearsto be continuing, and there is no evidence of any sig-nificant change in earlier trends as yet. Under thecircumstances, domestic market conditions would appearto call for a policy of continuing open market opera-tions aimed at stabilization of rates and flows. Withseasonal fluctuations in funds flows so large at thistime of the year, and with the balance of pressures onshort-term rates about to reverse, it would seem thatsuch policy must be couched primarily in terms of desiredmarket conditions rather than in terms of either aspecific marginal reserve target or any precise yieldexpectation for 3-month bills.Mr. Reynolds presented the following statement on the balanceof payments:The year end is typ.Lcally a period of large seasonaland erratic movements in international transactions. Thisyear, the difficulties of interpreting the data are com-pounded by uncertainties about the effects of Britain'sproblems, related policy actions, and the threat of aU.S. port strike. Also, we have just encountered a purelystatistical puzzle: the "flash" report by large banks ontheir foreign liabilities in November indicates a consider-ably larger over-all payments deficit in that month thanhas been suggested by weekly reports.In the circumstances, there seems to be little pointin speculating in detail on the fourth-quarter outcome.It seems clear that the seasonally adjusted deficit willbe larger than it was in the third quarter, and that thisresult will be mainly explained by the bulge in new foreignsecurity :ssues. Whether Britain's difficulties havetemporarily been producing an improvement in our figuresis hard to tell; to the extent that uncertainty aboutsterling has generated wider uneasiness about the wholeexchange rate structure, it may have produced adverse aswell as favorable capital flows.The deficit for the full year will probably workout at about $2-1/2 billion on "regular transactions"and perhaps $1 billion on "official settlements"--about$1 billion smaller on either measure than in 1963.-25- 12/15/64These guesses do not allow for the possibility thatBritain may request a waiver of $138 million of year-end debt service payments to the United States.Perhaps the most striking data that have becomeavailable in the past two weeks are the merchandisetrade figures for October. You will recall that asurge of exports in September was tentatively ascribedto anticipation of the port strike, which was thenpostponed. But now it turns out that exports did notfall back very much in October, and for September-October combined, they were 7 per cent above the firsthalf-year's rate and 12 per cent higher than a yearearlier. Even if some of this gain reflects chanceor anticipatory bunching of shipments, it seems clearthat exports were rising again in the autumn, after adip in the spring that had reflected the ending ofunusually large grain shipments, a decline in exportsto Japan, and some temporary leveling off in WesternEuropean demand, notably in Italy. The renewed autumnadvance shows up in shipments to all areas except theU.K. Imports, meanwhile, did not change in October,and were only a little higher that last spring.Over the two years to September-October, importsrose--rather unevenly--by 12 per cent, or about as muchas GNP. Exports over the same 2-year period increasedby an extraordinary 28 per cent. The resulting improve-ment in the trade surplus has been a major element ofstrength in our balance of payments position.Two main forces have been at work here: anunusually favorable cyclical position abroad, and abasic improvement in the U.S. competitive position.The cyclical upswing has been unusual both in itsstrength and in its world-wide character. Taking the2-year period as a whole, activity has been expandingvigorously in all industrial countries--the UnitedStates and Canada as well as Europe and Japan. Asin 1955-57, the boom has lifted the earnings of non-industrial countries as well, and after some lag theyhave sharply increased their imports.The European economies have generally been at fullstretch in this period. Their wholesale price levelsare now generally 10 to 20 per cent higher than theywere in 1960, whereas ours has not changed significantly.In recent months, prices have continued to rise inEurope. Only Italy and France have succeeded in slowing-26- 12/15/64their price-cost advances, although Germany continues tohold hers to modest proportions, and most other countriesfeel that they are beginning to bring the advance undercontrol. Thus, basic competitive trends have continuedto move in our favor, although they may not move asrapidly in this direction from new on.Prospects for short-run demand changes are moredifficult to assess. It seems most unlikely that thenonindustrial countries as a group can continue toincrease their imports at recent rates. Australia,for instance, had a 50 per cent increase in importsover the past year, and is now trying to rein in; sois South Africa. Some major Latin American countriesare now encountering renewed balance of payments dif-ficulties. In Europe, the shift in British policytowards internal restraint, and the import surcharges,will have major dampening effects. Against this,there may be some acceleration of demand expansion inthe months ahead in some continental European countries,notably Italy; and German business conditions continuebuoyant as before. Outside Europe, Japan is apparentlyincreasing its imports again, and Canadian demand con-tinues to expand. On balance, I would expect furtherexpansion in U.S. exports during 1965 at a rate thatwill be fairly satisfactory by historical standardsbut considerably less rapid than during the past twoyears.U.S. imports seem likely to be swollen in the nextfew months by strong inventory demand, notably for steel.Therefore, we should probably not expect further gainsin the trade surplus early in 1965. (And the threateneddock strife will, of course, distort the monthly figures.)But some improvement in the trade surplus for the year1965 as a whole over the year 1964 now seems more likelythan it did a short time ago. And if price stabilitycan be maintained in this country, the longer-run tradeprospects are also favorable, in my view.Mr. Deming asked what the pattern of the balance of paymentsdeficit for 1964 would be when figured on an official settlementsbasis. Mr. Reynolds replied that for the first three quarters ofthe year it had been running at an annual race of about $1 billion,-27- 12/15/64 -28-and there was no obvious reason to expect a substantial change inthe fourth quarter. But any fourth-quarter estimate now could beonly a guess since current figures were not collected on that basis.The weekly reports would have provided a clue to developments underordinary circumstances, but as he had noted the November flashreport by large banks, which gave no breakdown of liabilities asbetween official and private foreigners, appeared inconsistentwith the weekly reports. Also, large shifts between foreign privateand official holdings of dollars might, have been occurring becauseof uneasiness about the pound sterling. Accordingly, it was neces-sary to await the more detailed fourth-quarter figures before esti-mating the deficit for that quarter on an official settlements basi..Mr. Shepardson referred to Mr. Reynolds' comments on theoutlook for U.S. exports, and asked whether allowance had beenmade for a possible decline in agricultural exports. These hadbeen high this year, Mr. Shepardson noted, partly because ofdrought conditions abroad. Also, if he correctly read the in-dications; of current negotiations on Common Market farm policy,they implied a significant reduction in U.S. agricultural exportsto Europe.Mr. Reynolds replied that in assessing the outlook he hadassumed that the decline in farm exports as a result of the endingof the drought abroad and the lack of further Russian purchases of 12/15/64 -29-grain had run its course. He had not allowed for any further dropin connection w.th policy decisions by the Common Market on theground that the nature and effects of the decisions that would betaken were still uncertain.Mr. Mitchell commented that Mr. Reynolds' expectations forU.S. foreign trade seemed somewhat different from those implied inthe staff statement made in response to question 4. Mr. Reynoldsagreed that he saw some prospects for improvement that were notsuggested by the staff statement. In part this reflected the factthat his own views were toward the optimistic end of the range ofstaff opinion. But perhaps the more important explanation was thathe and other members of the staff had not fully absorbed the implica-tions of the figures for October when the response to the questionon the balance of payments was prepared. On the whole, however,his current expectations did not differ greatly from those impliedby the staff statement.Chairman Martin then called for the go-around of commentsand views on economic conditions and monetary policy, beginningwith Mr. Treiber. He noted that, in accordance with the understand-ing the members had reached in the afternoon following the December 1meeting, the Committee would adopt a new procedure in the go-aroundtoday; members were invited to address their remarks at least inpart to some or all of the questions and responses that had been 12/15/64prepared by the staff and distributed before this meeting.The staff materials to which the Chairman referred were asfollows:(1) Production, sales, and invent.ories--Taking into accountthe effects of recent and threatened work stoppages, is thestrength of current economic activity showing any signs ofdiminishing or increasing?After being dampened by work stoppages earlier in thefall, economic activity currently is receiving a temporarystimulus from strenuous efforts on the part of auto producersto bring retail inventories back to a level commensurate withthe record level of sales and by apparently widespread effortson the part of steel consumers to build up their stocks ofsteel in anticipation of a possible strike next May. Thesetwo influences are augmenting business inventory accumulationnow and will probably continue to encourage inventory invest-ment into early months of 1965, although strikes threatenedby longshoremen and railroad workers might prove to be adisruptive factor.Aside from these temporary influences, trends in othersectors of economic activity have shown little change fromearlier months. On balance, the underlying economic situationappears to be one of continuing moderate growth. As the yearends, business and consumer confidence remains at a highlevel, with recent surveys showing both groups anticipatingrising levels of spending in the months ahead.(2) Employment--Can the economy achieve a significantfurther reduction in the margin of underutilized manpower inthe near-term future without strong upward pressures onprices generally?The current prospect for further expansion inactivity at about the same rate as in the past year doesnot suggest any great likelihood of a significantfurther reduction in the margin of unutilized resourcesin the near future, because resources of manpower andindustrial equipment also are continuing to expand.Employment gains since May have been matched by in-creases in the labor force, and the unemployment ratehas fluctuated in the narrow range of 4.9 to 5.3 per cent.-30- 12/15/64Significant near-term reduction in unemployment wouldrequire one or more of the following developments:(1) a more rapid expansion in employment than has beentaking place recently. This could occur temporarilyearly next year because of the inventory buildupsrelated to recent and threatened strikes. But inautos and steel, employment in November and Decemberalready is very high and overime work has beenincreased to meet what may be a temporary peak load.In construction, notwithstanding an unusual seasonalrise in November, employment appears to have leveledoff. In trade and in public and private services,employment gains have been strong but steady;(2) a less than expected increase in the labor force.But expectations are likely to be realized ifdemands continue strong because the labor forcetends to respond positively to job opportunities;(3) a decline in the rate of productivity advance.This could occur but there is no evidence as yetof any moderation in what has been a high andsustained rate of advance. Substantial furtheradditions to plant capacity will be an importantfactor tending to maintain the advance inproductivity.So far, the supply of labor has been adequate to meetexpanding demands without any strong general upward pressureon prices. In some industries, strong demands have requiredconsiderable overtime work and active recruiting and trainingprograms. The balance of forces affecting bargaining hasbeen such that in some cases, notably in the auto industry,settlements have been larger than the general rate of pro-ductivity advance in the private economy. In September andOctober, labor costs per unit of output in manufacturingrose, but only to the level of December 1963, and a signif-icant share of the rise is believed to reflect the workstoppages in autos. The critical question, not yet resolved,is whether the wage patterns developing in industries showinghigh productivity increases, such as autos, will spread toindustries showing lower productivity increases.(3) Price developments--Have upward price pressures beengetting stronger and more pervasive?High rates of economic activity in the United Statesand abroad have maintained strong upward price pressures inmarkets for nonferrous metals. In some cases upward pressures-31- 12/15/64have been intensified by political disturbances or strikesthat have limited production. There are reasonably goodprospects, however, that pressures in some of these marketswill ease in the near future.Outside the nonferrous metal markets, price changescontinue to be selective. Industrial commodities as agroup rose only slightly further in November and earlyDecember, following the October advance.With prices of industrial materials increasing little,and with labor costs per unit of output in manufacturing nohigher then a year ago, prices of finished goods have notbeen subject to pervasive upward cost pressures. Wholesaleand retail prices of consumer goods (other than foods) havebeen stable all this year. Prices of producers' equipment,on the average, have been stable since spring, following arise of 1 per cent over the preceding 6 to 8 months. Ageneral steel price increase, of course, would seriouslythreaten this pattern of over-all stability.(4) Balance of payments--Have underlying influences recentlybeen tending to strengthen or to weaken the position of thedollar internationally?Continuing uneasiness about the pound sterling istending temporarily to strengthen the dollar in some waysand to weaken it in others. U.S. trade figures are beingdistorted to an unknown extent by anticipations of apossible port strike. Underneath all this churning,however, it is possible to discern some of the underlyingforces that are likely to be of decisive importance overthe period ahead.Basic trends in the competitive position for merchandisetrade have been favorable for five years. But efforts toslow down price-cost advances in Europe are beginning totake effect. Therefore, continuation of favorable compet-itive trends hinges increasingly upon the continuedmaintenance of price stability in the United States.Changing demand conditions may limit further improvementin the trade surplus in the short run. The large increasein exports during the past two years resulted partly fromfavorable cyclical forces. Growth in U.S. exports now willbe slowed by recent U.K. policy actions, less buoyantexpansion in some other industrial countries (e.g., France),and less rapid growth in the imports of some nonindustrialcountries. Meanwhile, U.S. imports, after increasing in-32- 12/15/64 -33-line with GNP for two years, may rise more briskly incoming months, especially if inventory demands are strong.Income from foreign investments remains on a stronglyrising trend. But the increase in receipts will be smallerin 1965 than in 1964, mainly because tax factors shiftedsome dividends from 1963 to 1964.Relative credit conditions shifted adversely in 1963-64as credit tightened in Europe and Japan and remained readilyavailable here. While covered interest rate relationshipsaffecting movements of liquid funds have not changed signif-icantly, both short- and long-term rates have generallyrisen more abroad than here. Also, U.S. banks have beeneager to expand their foreign lending. Outflows of U.S.private capital will have risen to a new high of more than$5 billion in 1964, including about $2 billion of directinvestments, $1 billion of new foreign security issues, and$1-1/2 billion of total bank lending. If any largebalance of payments improvement is to cccur during 1965 ina context of continuing U.S. economic expansion, most ofthe improvement must take place in capital flows. No earlyeasing of credit conditions abroad can be counted upon tohelp.Continuing erosion of the U.S. incernational reserveposition points to a need for showing significant furtherimprovement in the payments position fairly soon, or atleast for policies that would ensure ccntinuation offavorable basic trends. Questions arise, however, aboutthe rate of improvement that is needed and feasible in thelight of other objectives, and about the mix of Governmentpolicies most likely to achieve desired results.(5) Money supply and liquidity--What interpretation shouldbe placed on recent fluctuations in the rate of expansionin bank credit and the money supply?Fluctuations in the rate of growth of total bankcredit in recent months have reflected in large part theunusual pattern of Treasury financing operations. Thiswas particularly true of the July decline and Augustincrease in credit and the unusually large increase inNovember. A major factor in the disparate changes inSeptember and October was the fact that the last-Wednesdayreporting date for September was the last day of the month.This resulted in the recording of the large end-of-monthcredit increase in September rather than, as is more usual, 12/15/64in October. Since midyear the rate of growth in bankcredit has been about 8 per cent, the same as over thefirst half of this year.Within the aggregate of recent credit expansion,however, there has been some change in composition.Expansion in total loans since midyear has been some-what slower than earlier this year while holdings ofinvestmerts have increased somewhat faster. The rateof growth of business loans, on the other hand, hascontinued in recent months at an annual rate of closeto 10 per cent, the same as earlier in the year.The seasonally adjusted money supply rose $500million in November, at the lower end of the $500-$800million range of monthly increases which has prevailedsince July. Over this period, the annual rate ofgrowth has been 4.6 per cent, considerably above the2 per cent average for the first five months of thisyear but considerably below the 8-1/2 per cent rate ofJune and July.Short-run fluctuations in money supply growth suchas chese do not represent a departure from earlierexperienne in this series. A certain degree of lumpinessin money expansion results from short-run shifts betweenprivate and Government deposits and from attempts by thepublic to bring money balances into line with desiredlevels after temporary departures from those levels.Factors which might have contributed to such fluctuationsthis year would include: (1) heavy consumer buying inanticipation of a tax cut and large acquisitions ofsecuritie by the consumer sector in the early months ofthis year; and (2) a restoration of previously reducedbalances, together with a lag in the adjustment ofexpenditures and savings flows to the increase in dis-posable personal income stemming from the tax cut, inJune and July. The growth rate in money balances sinceJuly, while somewhat more rapid than the 3.9 per centrate for the first seven months of this year, is not outof line with the recent rapid rise in GNP, both in currentand in constant dollars.The emergence of a substantial uptrend in seasonallyadjusted demand deposits at city banks since spring, aftera period of several years of little change, suggests thatbusinesses as well as consumers now may be increasing theirmoney holdings more closely in line with transactions needs.The recent decline in the rate of growth in CDs would beconsistent with such a development.-34- 12/15/64(6) Money and credit markets--Are the adjustments tothe discount rate increase in money and capital marketsand in bank reserve positions completed, or are theycontinuing?It appears that the adjustments in yield relation-ships to the discount rate actions per se have beensubstantially completed, although some consequent changesin financial flows may still be in process and day-to-dayrate fluctuations may continue for a time to be widerthan usual. However, basic yield relationships are stillsubject to stress from the seasonal reversal of pressuresin short-term markets after mid-December as well as frompossible shifts in underlying supply-demand relations inboth sho::t- and longer-term markets.Following the initial adjustments, bond yieldsreturned to levels close to those obtaining at the timethe official actions were taken. This resulted in partfrom market interpretations of official statements andalso from continuing expectations that the flow of long-term savings to investing institutions would continuelarge--and perhaps be enhanced by the recent amendmentsto Regulation Q--while long-term credit demands wouldremain relatively moderate. Municipal and corporatesecurity flotations have been well received recently,but the basic strength of the long-tern market will befurther tested in January if the Treasury undertakeslonger-term financing operations at that time, as it hasin the past several years.Upward adjustments of short-term rates have amountedto as much as 25 basis poirts, resulting in furtherflattening of the yield curve in the shorter maturityrange. Rates on Treasury bills have settled down somewhatbelow the highs reached in the initial adjustment, whilerates on other short-term instruments generally have heldat the levels reached in early December.Banks appear to have adapted to the new discount ratein management of their reserve positions, although currentseasonal pressures tend to obscure basic trends. So longas the 3-month Treasury bill rate does not rise closer tothe discount rate, the tendency which emerged in the pastthree weeks for banks to want to keep borrowings at somewhatlower levels is likely to persist.(7) Monetary policy--In light of these and otherconsiderations, what policy with respect to bank reserves-35- 12/15/64and money market conditions would be appropriate forthe next four weeks?Mr. Treiber commented that at past meetings the statementof the New York Bank member usually had focused on the areas of anumber of these questions, and his statement today would be con-cerned with all of them. Mr. Treiber then made the followingstatement:1. Domestic economic activity. The domesticeconomy continues to be basically strong despite somedistortion of current statistics because of the autostrikes in October and November. Ecoromic activitymay be expected to continue to increase. There are,however, uncertainties over labor-management problemsincluding threatened strikes of railroad workers andlongshoremen within the week, and possibly steelworkers in the spring.Retailers are generally highly optimistic aboutChristmas sales, and longer-run strength in theconsumer area is suggested by the October Censussurvey of consumer buying intentions.Business confidence is high. There is furtherindication of strength in capital spending. TheNovember Commerce-SEC survey of plant and equipmentspending plans indicates an upgrading for the secondhalf of 1964, and a further advance in the first halfof 1965. The new survey is consistent with the viewthat 1965 will see another sizeable advance in plantand equipment spending, though perhaps not as largeas in 1964.While both inventory and sales figures have beendistorted by the auto strike, it seems likely thatthere has been some basic accumulation of inventory.So far the building of steel inventory has beenmoderate, but a big push in steel inventory accumula-tion is expected in the first quarter of 1965.2. Employment. The November decline in theunemployment rate to 5.0 per cent from 5.2 per centin October is encouraging, even though some of theimprovement is due to the unusually favorable weather-36- 12/15/64conditions which permitted more workers than usual toengage in construction and other outdoor work. Theunemployment rate for married men is the lowest it hasbeen in more than seven years. There are shortagesin various types of skilled labor. The unemploymentproblem is most severe among the unskilled, particularlyteenagers.To cope with the problem of unemployment, greaterstress will have to be placed on measures to raise thegeneral level of education, to improve and expandparticular types of technical training, to induce youngpeople to take full advantage of educational andtraining opportunities, and to enhance labor mobilityas well as equality of access to job opportunities.While adequate credit is important to a dynamic andexpanding economy and helps to provide job opportu-nities, merely increasing over-all demand by expandingcredit will not solve the unemployment problemstemming from lack of education and training. Thereis great risk that pressing to increase over-alldemand will push up prices generally withoutsubstantially reducing unemployment.3. Prices. There has been no clear change inthe price picture. The consumer price index continuesits relatively mild upward drift. Industrial wholesaleprices apear to have risen a bit more than seasonally.Specific price announcements continue to be predominantlyon the up side. On the other hand, there still continueto be some announcements of price reductions. It istoo early to assess the impact on the general pricelevel of recent wage agreements. Yet it is apparentthat general price tendencies are upward.4. Balance of payments. The latest balance ofpayments figures indicate a large deficit--$272 million--for November. Little can be said on the outlook forDecember, since many cross-currents are at work. Thereis the possibility of a deferment of $138 million ofyear-end interest and amortization payments by theBritish. Our deficit for 1964 is likely to be between$2 and $2-1/2 billion; this is too large. A muchlarger proportion of the deficit is reflected in abuildup of private balances than in other recent years.If, however, private holders of U.S. dollars becomenervous, there could be a large transfer of thosedollars to official bodies with the resultant potentialdrain on our gold supply.-37- 12/15/64The outflow of U.S. private capital in 1964 willprobably exceed $5 billion; this is $1 billion more thanin 1963. The outflow this year is at about the same ratethat existed in the first half of 1963 before the mid-summer ircrease in United States interest rates and theproposal of the interest equalization tax. A large partof the increased outflow in 1964 has occurred in theshort-term area; there have been continuous increasesthroughout the year in short-term bank credits andholdings of U.S. dollar deposits and money market assetsabroad. We cannot tell at this time to what extent therecent increase in our discount rate and in maximumpermissible rates under Regulation Q may tend to reversethe previous outflows.The British situation is still very serious. Anythreat to sterling as a reserve currercy is a threat tothe whole international financial structure including theU.S. dollar and its role as a reserve currency. Eventhough the United States may have an inflow as a resultof Britain's unfortunate experience, such an inflow isnot a sign of fundamental U.S. strength. So long assterling is under pressure we cannot say that the positionof the dollar is really stronger internationally.5 and 6. Credit conditions. Month to monthfluctuations in total bank credit have been unusuallyerratic in the last few months. There have also beensubstantial fluctuations over the year in the rate ofexpansion in the money supply. In the longer run,however, growth has been continuous and substantial.Bank reserves, bank credit, and the money supplyhave continued to grow in 1964 at about the same substan-tial pace as in 1961, 1962, and 1963. Over that periodaggregate bank credit has advanced almost steadily atabout 8 per cent each year. The money supply has risenabout 3 per cent a year on average and in the last twoyears at about 4 per cent a year. It is significantthat other forms of liquid assets have also kept growing.The ratio of total liquid assets of the nonbank publicto gross national product is now higher than at therecession trough of 1961; in previous expansions theratio has declined as the economy expanded.As the demand for bank credit has expanded with theexpansion of the economy over the last few years, theSystem has accommodated those demands by providing anexpanding volume of reserves. The cost of the additional-38- 12/15/64reserves and short-term interest rates have risen andthe tone of the money market has firmed as free reserveshave declined; but the additional reserves have beenprovided to support the credit expansion.The banks have pressed to expand their loans.Reserves have been sufficiently available to enablethem to meet the demands of their domestic customersand to seek aggressively and successfully to increasetheir foreign loans unconnected with exports.Savings appear to be readily available for long-term capital purposes. Two large issues of utilitybonds were publicly offered at yields which were aboutthe same as the yields on similar issues offered beforethe recent discount rate increase.7. Monetary policy. Over the longer run thecontinuing large deficit in the U.S. balance of paymentsrequires, and the generally strong domestic businessoutlook counsels, some reduction in credit availability.A reduction in availability would be helpful in restrain-ing lending by banks to foreigners. Such a reductionwould be reflected in a somewhat, slower rate of growthof bank credit. The time has not yet come, however, totake overt steps in that direction; rather the Systemshould aim at maintaining relatively stable money marketconditions in the coming weeks and at observing the effectof the higher rate structure on the growth of bank credit.The possibility of an early advance refunding by theTreasury also counsels market stability at this time.The money market has adjusted well to the recentincrease in the discount rate. But the effects of thepolicy change have not fully worked their way throughthe market. The banks' needs for reserves are at aseasonal peak; normal market forces put Treasury billrates under considerable pressure at this time.The tone of the money market would appear to be themost important guide over the next four weeks; the amountof free reserves should be subordinated. A three-monthTreasury bill rate within the range of 3.75-3.90 per centwould seem appropriate. There should be maximum flexi-bility to respond to market developments.Mr. Treiber then referred to the draft directives that hadbeen submitted by the staff, and indicated that lie preferred-39- 12/15/64 -40-alternative B for the second paragraph because it placed primaryemphasis on money market conditions.Mr. Shuford said that he had considered the questions andresponses that: had been prepared by tne staff and had made a fewnotes regarding them. however, since his views did not differ inbasic respect; from those set forth in the staff statements hewould not comment on details, but instead would offer some briefgeneral observations.It appeared that the domestic economy was continuing toexpand, Mr. Shuford said, although the autcmobile strikes werecontinuing to blur the analysis. Most recent statistics, such asthose on employment, production, and total construction, had beenfavorable. Over the longer periods that perhaps were more relevantfor purposes of policy formulation, most indicators of economicactivity had been increasing, after allowance was made for theeffects of strikes. Prices in some sensitive areas had risen butthe over-all indexes remained relatively stable.It seemed to Mr. Shuford that it was still too early tomake a completely satisfactory evaluation of the effect on thedomestic economy of the recent increase in the discount rate andthe accompanying rise in short-term market rates. These events1/ The staff's draft directives are appended to these minutesas Attachment A. 12/15/64 -41-might have some dampening effect, but the economy was strongand should not turn down or slow unduly as a result of them.Activity had been moving ahead with considerable momentum, andmonetary actions had been relatively stimulative from May toNovember.The most recent data on rates of expansion in reservesand money seemed to Mr. Shuford to have shown some appropriatemoderation from summer and early autumn rates. Since September,total reserves of member banks had risen at less than a 2 percent annual rate. This was down significantly from the 5 percent rate that had prevailed since November 1963. However, thecontraction in the growth rate in total reserves had been aboutmatched by a reduction in Treasury tax and loan account balancesat commercial banks, freeing reserves for the support of privatedeposits. The money supply had risen at a 4.2 per cent annualrate since September, a rate which was much lower than that oflast summer but about double the average since 1951.Mr. Shuford noted that the present turn-of-the-yearperiod typically was characterized by considerable churning inthe money market. He thought it would be advisable, in view ofboth the international and domestic situations, for the Committeeto mark time for this period, attempting to keep money marketconditions relatively stable. He agreed with Mr. Treiber's 12/15/64 -42-suggestions with respect to the general approach that might betaken. Certainly, the level of free reserves should be anincidental consideration during the next few weeks. He would notfavor having the Desk operate entirely on the basis of the toneand feel of the market; some statistical measure should be usedas a guide to operations. In his opinion the bill rate continuedto be the best guide for the time being, and the 3.75-3.90 percent bill rate range discussed at the preceding meeting remainedappropriate for the next few weeks.Mr. Bryan commented that recent statistics for the SixthDistrict: did not seem to reflect developments that were ofparticular significance for, or predictive of, national economictrends. Therefore, he would turn to the questions submitted bythe staff. On a number of these questions he had little tocontribute beyond the staff's analysis. For example, he wouldaccept the staff reply to question 1, concerning production, sales,and inventories. On the second question, whether a significantfurther reduction in unemployment was possible without strongupward price pressures, there was a problem in his mind relatingto the word "significant." He would expect that some reductionin unemployment could be achieved if the economy continued toexpand, but in view of the expected large increases in the laborforce he was not sure that there could be a significant reduction. 12/15/64 -43-There was some limiting factor in any expansion, and in thepresent situation this factor might take the form of difficultyin matching the skills of available labor with those required,at wage rates that were satisfactory to the unemployed.Regarding question 3 on prices, it seemed to Mr. Bryanthat there was no clear indication that the country was under-going an inflationary development at present. However, on theaverage, whoesale industrial commodity prices had moved up a bitrecently. Also, the upward movement continued in the consumerprice index and in some of its elements. While these movementsmight have been matched by improvements in quality of consumergoods, there also were a considerable number of "hidden" priceincreases--that is, increases that were inadequately reflected inthe index. Whether average retail prices of consumer goods (otherthan foods) actually had been stable thus seemed to him to beuncertain.On question 4, which called for an evaluation of thedirection of "underlying influences recently" on the internationalposition of the dollar, there was a problem associated with themeaning of the word "recently." Perhaps the intention was torefer to recent weeks. Over a somewhat longer period the U.S.balance of payments position had improved, and the country mightbe about to make great further "progress" by revising its 12/15/64 -44-bookkeeping methods, which would be a commendable step. Butit seemed to Mr. Bryan that the deficit was going to be hugeover a perioc of years however it was calculated. The countryseemed to be bleeding to death through these deficits.Mr. Bryan said he was not sure what interpretationshould be placed on the recent fluctuations in the growth ratesof bank credit and the money supply, referred to in question 5.He would agree that money supply growth on a year-to-year basishad been within a reasonable range. But he also felt that moneysupply expansion in the past four months had been greater thanthe country could absorb readily without setting the stage forinflationary developments, and that in the same period reservegrowth by any measure had been at a rate that was not sustainablein the long run.A free market always was in process of adjustment, Mr.Bryan said, so his answer to question 6 would be that the adjust-ments t the discount rate increase were continuing. The realissue was whether a reasonable degree of market stability nowcould be expected. In his judgment this would depend on whetherthe rescue operation for the pound sterling proved to be successful,or whether the imbalances were so great that the operation wouldnot succeed. 12/15/64 -45-Mr. Bryan favored an essentially unchanged monetarypolicy. He agreed that an objective formulated in terms of billrates was appropriate for the next four weeks and thought thatthe range of 3.75-3.90 per cent in the three-month bill rate thathad been suggested would give the Manager ample latitude. In hisopinion the Committee could not rely on any reserve figure fortarget purposes at present; as Mr. Stone had pointed out, itwould be necessary to deal with complex patterns of developmentsover the coming period.Mr. Bopp observed that although the course of production,sales, and inventories at this time was clouded by the effects ofthe past and possible future labor difficulties, on balance theeconomy appeared to be continuing along a moderate growth trend,with more room to go before problems arose of labor and resourceavailability. It always was important to look ahead, however,especially at a time such as the present when the economy mightbe approaching a cyclical turning point.Looking ahead, Mr. Bopp continued, there was the strongpossibility that some slackening would develop because of adecumulation of inventories, a reduced rate of increase in capitaland housing expenditures, and a shift to a surplus position in theFederal budget. This longer-run view seemed to him one of themost important aspects of the economy to bear in mind. He did not 12/15/64 -46-feel that price increases, thus far, posed a particularlydisturbing problem for economic stability. The human andmaterial resources were available. Much depended on industrialrelations developments in the railroad and steel industries andon the attitude of the administration toward any settlements.The recent rates of expansion in money and credit appearedappropriate to the domestic business envircnmnnt.As for the balance of payments, Mr. Bopp thought thedeficit was a continuing and difficult problem, but one that hadto be kept in proper perspective within the context of a possiblyweakening business environment. For the time being he would beinclined to sit tight and watch developments closely.Mr. Bopp said he would make no charge in the currentposture of monetary policy, although he would be inclined to letshort-term rates approach the lower limits of recent levels ifnecessary to maintain about the same growth in money and creditas had prevailed in recent months and if necessary to maintainlonger-term interest rates substantially unchanged.Mr. Bopp reported that at a meeting last Thursday(December 10) of economists representing various firms andindustries in the Third District, the consensus had been that theeconomy would continue to expand throughout 1965, although at aslower rate during the second half of the year. The median 12/15/64 -47-forecast of the group was for a 3.8 per cent increase in GNP atan annual rate in current dollars from the fourth quarter of 1964to June of 1965, and another 1.2 per cent increase from June toDecember. The group expected plant and equipment expenditures tobe somewhat higher than McGraw-Hill's 5 per cent projected increase.Residential construction was expected to provide neither a lift nora drag on the economy. With some living off of inventory, steelproduction was expected to decline from an expected 124 millioningot tons in 1964 to 115 million in 1965. Auto and truck outputwas expected to be 9.1 million units in 1965 compared to 9.3million units in 1964.Mr. Bopp concluded by noting that he preferred alternativeB of the staff's drafts for the second paragraph of the directive.Mr. Hickman observed that with the auto strikes finally outof the way, the domestic economy was getting back into full stride.Production and consumer takings were both moving forward. Exceptfor the possibility of dock or rail strikes, the near-term prospectall were on the side of continuing expansion at high rates.There had been only one recent development in the FourthDistrict that had differed significantly from national trends,Mr. Hickman said, and that occurred in the area of construction.Earlier this year, construction contracts in F. W. Dodge's RegionIV (roughly the Fourth Federal Reserve District) had been lagging 12/15/64behind those in the nation, but this pattern was reversed inSeptember and October because of a clustering of several verylarge building contracts in Ohio. This development was areflection of the strength of heavy industries at this stageof the business expansion.As he had noted earlier in these meetings, Mr. Hickmancontinued, a disturbing factor in the current business situationwas the stockpiling of steel as a hedge against a possiblestrike in 1965. Events were now moving into the full-fledgedaccumulation stage. The steel mills were running briskly, butsome of their business, in effect, was being borrowed from nextyear.Mr. Hickman reported that at the e.d of 1964, steelusers would have on hand an estimated 17 million tons offinished steel. By May 1, barring an early settlement, steelusers would have about 21 million tors on hand, as comparedwith a normal range of 12 to 14 million tons. While this wouldnot be as large as the steel inventory peak of 26-1/2 milliontons reached in the accumulation phase preceding the long 1959strike, it would be appreciably larger than amounts stocked in1962 and 1963. If all other factors were equal, the cut-backof production following the settlement could be absorbed by theeconomy. The danger was, however, that other things might not-48- 12/15/64 -49-be equal. He referred specifically to the prospects of asmaller deficit, or possible surplus, in the Federal budgetin the spring of 1965. It was at least conceivable that onthese and other grounds the economy might be in for a seriousadjustment around the middle of next year.In this context, Mr. Hickman remarked, an attempt atpresent to further stimulate aggregate demand through astepped-up rate of expansion of money and credit would makethe adjustment more difficult. No growth at all would beequally upsetting, and would be untenable politically. Hethought the Committee should, therefore, continue to strivefor modest, sustainable growth, on the order of 3 to 4 percent for the money supply and of about 6 to 8 per cent forbank credit. In his judgment, except for a brief period ofsloppy ease last summer the Committee had held fairly well tothe appropriate course, and it should continue along the samepath as best it could.Mr. Hickman said the present state of the money market,and to a lesser extent of the capital market, was stable butnervous, and it required unusually close attention to preventits running off in either direction. He would, therefore,continue the policy adopted at the last meeting, attempting asa primary objective to hold the 91-day bill rate in a range of 12/15/64 -50-3.75-3.90 per cent on the bid side, and as a secondary objectiveto provide average free reserves of about $50 million, plus orminus $100 million. For these reasons he preferred alternativeB of the drafts for the second paragraph of the policy directiveMr. Hickman said that his reactions to the staff'squestions, prepared largely before receiving the staff's answers,could be summarized as follows:(1) Although up-to-date figures were not available, thecurrent growth rates of production, sales, and inventoriesappeared to him to be very high, and probably not sustainablebeyond 4 or 5 months. In this connection it seemed to him thatthe first paragraph of the staff analysis, which described thetemporary influences augmenting inventory accumulation, wasquite satisfactory. The second paragraph, however, seemed tohim to be inappropriate, because it tended to brush off thesignificance of what had already been said in the first para-graph. The opening phrase, "Aside from these temporaryinfluences," marked the path of the brush-off. The secondsentence ("On balance, the underlying econonic situationappears to be one of continuing moderate growth") then completedthe brush-off.Some definite unbalancing forces obviously were atwork in the economy, Mr. Hickman said. It was an artificial 12/15/64 -51-device to distinguish between "underlying" factors, on the onehand, and "temporary" or "special" factors on the other, in asituation where the unbalancing forces were so deeply woveninto the economy as was the case with the present steelinventory situation and with other inventories.(2) In Mr. Hickman's opinion the ecconomy could achievea reduction in the margin of underutilized man power (or ratherteen power and woman power) without upward price pressures,provided it was done largely through specific structural measuresrather than entirely through additional aggregate demand.Mr. Treiber's comments on this question were nearer to his ownthinking than were the staff's.(3) In the price area, the various diffusion indexesthat Mr. Hickman watched had been above 50 per cent for manymonths, with the National Association of Purchasing Agents'diffusicn index showing an increase in November for the fifthconsecutive month.(4) With reference to the balance of payments,Mr. Hickman commented that outpayments from Government programsand private capital flows obviously were still larger than netearnings on current account. Despite much discussion of thebalance of payments problem, no one appeared to be able toforesee what the future held in store. 12/15/64(5) As he had indicated earlier, Mr. Hickman feltrecent changes in the money supply and liquidity had beenappropriate and had been roughly in line with what heconsidered to be sustainable trends in measures of realeconomic activity.(6) From the impressions he had gained on the dailytelephone conference call during the past two weeks, the moneyand capital markets appeared to be stable but nervous.(7) In light of these considerations Mr. Hickman wouldcontinue for the present to pay primary attention to market tone,with secondary emphasis on bank reserves and the money supply.Mr. Mitchell remarked that in considering the realalternatives for monetary policy today the Committee had torecognize that the System had made a trade-off between thebalance of payments constraint and domestic needs when thediscount rate was raised, and in effect had announced this tothe world. At the same time, the System had said in effectthat it was going to minister to the needs of the domesticeconomy by continuing to make funds available. Subsequently,these statements were reinforced by the operations of the Desk.The market had accepted the feasibility of the kind of trade-offthat had been announced, and Mr. Mitchell did not think it wasrealistic at present for the Committee to consider a departure-52- 12/15/64 -53-from the described policy. Since the System had convinced themarket that such a policy could be implemented, the onlyquestions confronting the Committee today were how to continueto implement it, and how to avoid arousing expectations that itwould not be possible to do so.Mr. Mitchell said he would accept the Manager's judgmentthat it would not be feasible now to follow a free reserve target.He noted that Mr. Partee had recommended an instruction in termsof desired market conditions, but he had not offered any specificlanguage for such an instruction. Mr. Mitchell would accept abill rate target, but would prefer a range of 3.65-3.85 per cent,to give rates a chance to flex a little in accordance withseasonal changes.All things considered, Mr. Mitchell did not think theshort-run posture of monetary policy could be very differentfrom this at the present time. However, it was necessary torecogniz, that monetary policy operated with a lag, and theCommittee also should be thinking in terms of the longer run; inparticular, it should be taking account of the possibility thatthe pace of activity might slacken in the coming year. Perhapsthe most the Committee could do was to keep expectations out ofunrealistic channels. Expectations on the business outlookranged from boom to a leveling off or decline in activity, and 12/15/64 -54-it was desirable to avoid prejudicing and one of these views bya prejudged monetary policy. Mr. Partee had raised a questionabout the sustainability of the present flat yield curve, andhad concluced it was reasonable to expect from market forcesthat long-term rates would remain at about their present levels.The Committee ought to avoid discouraging such an expectation,based as it was on an analysis of market forces.Mr. Mitchell said that, by and large, he thought thestaff's questions and answers made up a good document. He agreedin general with the analyses presented and he was especiallyimpressed with those on financial subjects. He was unhappy,however, with the staff response to question 2, on employment.The analysis seemed to him to be quite unrealistic, and he wassympathetic with Mr. Treiber's views on this subject. Hedisagreed with Mr. Hickman's criticism of the reply to the firstquestion; it seemed to him that if monetary policy created anenvironment conducive to rising investment, which he thought itshould do, it could not prevent people from hoarding steel orfrom increasing their inventories of autos. As he read theparagraph Mr. Hickman had criticized, it implied that the specialfactors leading to accumulation of steel and autos had not spreadto the rest of the economy. In his judgment such accumulationshould not be choked off by monetary policy; rather, it shouldbe accommodated, unless it became pervasive. 12/15/64 -55-Mr. Hickman said that Mr. Mitchell evidently hadmisunderstood his comment, because he had not meant to suggestthat the current inventory accumulations should be choked off.As he had indicated, he did not think that the Committee shouldattempt to stimulate aggregate demand further, but at the sametime he would consider no growth in money and credit to beuntenable. In short, he preferred to continue the presentpolicy. His objection to the paragraph in question was that itimplied that, apart from temporary factors, the prospects werefor continued economic growth. In his judgment the more likelydevelopment w.s a letdown in activity after the inventorybuild-up had run its course.Mr. Brill commented that the staff had had a relativelyshort time horizon in mind when it prepared the paragraph inquestion. It was the staff's view that, aside from the temporaryinventory accumulation, underlying fo::ces suggested continuedgrowth in the short run. The staff h. not intended to imply ajudgment that growth would continue through the balance of 1965.Mr. Swan commented that in his view the most importantquestion with regard to the current steel and auto inventoryaccumulations was whether there would be some reaction on therest of the economy when they came to an end. Mr. Mitchellagreed, and Mr. Hickman noted that such a development might well 12/15/64 -56-occur at a time when the Federal budget was shifting to asurplus position, thus compounding the problem.Mr. Shepardson said that he thought the staff'sresponses to the questions on the whole were good, and ingeneral he agreed with them. It was important, in his judgment,to distinguish between two possible reasons for the inventorydevelopments that had just been discussed. If steel inventorieswere being accumulated as a hedge against anticipated pricerises, that definitely would be something to be deplored, andthe Committee should do what it could to discourage it. But ashe understood the situation, larger steel stocks were desiredprimarily as a hedge against a possible stoppage of supply. Hedoubted if the Committee could do anything to stop such adevelopment despite the fact that it might result in a letdownlater unless there was a long strike in the steel industry,which would be equally unfortunate.Mr. Shepardson remarked that he had some questions aboutthe staff's analysis on employment, particularly in connectionwith the list of alternatives given. He would have put morestress on the need for efforts toward structural improvement,at the same time recognizing that monetary policy could not domuch in this respect. He also questioned the implication thatgrowth in the labor force would be adequate to meet the demand 12/15/64 -57-for labor. As he interpreted current reports, there weregrowing shortages of some types of skilled workers and someupward pressures on costs.On the subject of prices, Mr. Shepardson was under theimpression from the announcements he saw in the press thatincreases in wholesale prices were more widespread than hadbeen indicated. Moreover, even if wholesale prices werereasonably stable on average, the stability resulted in partfrom the fact that decreases in farm prices were offsettingrises in industrial prices. It was important not to be misledby a stable average of these two diverging components.On the balance of payments, Mr. Shepardson commentedthat the nature of the settlement by the Common Market countriescould not be foreseen, but any settlement was likely to curbU.S. agricultural exports to Europe, apart from the declinesthat were to be expected from the unusually high level of exportsthis year resulting from droughts abroad. All indications werethat any agreement would involve changes ir the European agricul-ture price structure and restrictions on imports that would beadverse to U.S. agricultural exports. This was a matter ofparticular concern in the context of the more general problemof a continuing adverse balance of payments. 12/15/64On the money supply, Mr. Shepardson said, the growthrate of 4.2 per cent so far in 1964 was, if anything, a littlehigher than he would consider sustainable on a longer-run basis.He did not understand why so much emphasis was placed in variousstaff documents on the demand-deposit component of money, andso little on the currency component, which was growing rapidly.In his judgment the figures on the total money supply were themore appropriate ones to consider.In sum, Mr. Shepardson remarked, be thought there weregrounds for shifting to a somewhat less expansionary positionnow--to a little less ease. On the other hand, he recognizedthat various circumstances--including seasonal pressures,uncertainties of various kinds, and the possibility of aTreasury financing--all argued for no change in policy at thepresent time. Hence, while he was inclined toward a policy ofa little less ease, he concluded that such a shift would not beappropriate at this time.With respect to the directive, Mr. Shepardson said hehad been disturbed for some time by the cataloging in the firstparagraph of the factors that the Committee took into account,without any particular order to the listing and without anycharacterization of the Committee's assessment of the implicationsof each factor for policy. The second sentence of the draft the-58- 12/15/64 -59-staff had prepared for today's meeting, for example, referredto some factors that argued for less ease, some that argued formore ease, and some that might have implication in bothdirections. He proposed replacing this sentence with languagealong the following lines, in which he had tried to group andproperly characterize the various considerations as he saw them:The Committee seeks to keep further monetarystimulus within moderate bounds in view of thepersistence of a sizable deficit in the U.S. balanceof payments, the upward drift of prices of selectedindustrial commodities, the current pickup inactivity related to recent and threatened workstoppages, and the already sizable expansion in bankcredit and money that has occurred in 1964. On theother hand, the Committee recognizes some furthermoney and credit expansion is called for by theorderly and moderate character of the economicexpansion apart from the strike influences, and bythe persisting margin of underutilized resources.The Committee also takes special cognizance of thesomewhat conflicting effects on the standing of thedollar that are resulting from marketuncertaintiesabout the pound sterling.Mr. Shepardson preferred alternative B for the secondparagraph of the directive, but he would omit the last clausewhich read "while accommodating moderate expansion in aggregatebank reserves." It seemed to him that this clause was redundant,since the first sentence of the first paragraph included thewords "accommodating moderate growth in the reserve base, bankcredit, and the money supply." 12/15/64Mr. Robertson said he thought the staff had taken anexcellent first step in pointing up the factors on which theCommittee should focus most directly. The procedure might beaugmented in the future by raising other questions with whichthe Committee should grapple, such as that of quantification.Also, he hoped that a better job could be done in the futurein providing the linkages between the subjects discussed underquestion 5 and 6, although he recognized that this was adifficult task.Mr. Robertson said that in his statement he wouldcomment first on the staff responses to each of the questions,and then on policy. He then made the following statement:(1) Production, sales, and inventories. I haveno quarrel with what the staff wrote, but it isimportant, to recognize that the suggested bulge ininventory accumulation, along with other economicdevelopments going on in such fields as housing andFederal finance, increases our exposure both tounsustainable and even inflationary increases inactivity in the short run, and--equally important--toa letdown in business activity later on in the year.I doubt that monetary policy can deal with so narrowlybased a distortion, but we ought to watch it carefully.(2) Employment. The staff answer is good. Itemphasizes that the labor force growth will give usmore workers to produce added output. It shows weshould not base monetary policy on any assumption thatwe are about to enter an overemployment situation,with a wage-price spiral inevitable.(3) Price developments. No added comment isnecessary. The staff notes that price increases arenot spreading rapidly. With average prices of allmaterials up very little, and unit labor costs stillas low as last year, there are no necessary upwardcost pressures on prices of final products as yet.-60- 12/15/64But we should keep a wary eye on the developmentsin steel!(4) Balance of payments. The staff review ishelpful in putting things in perspective. It isinteresting to note that it has not been the short-term flow of liquid funds (which were assumed to be sointerest sensitive) that have bulked large in ourcapital outflow this year (only about $1/2 billion orso out of $5 billion capital outflow). The big factorshave been our direct long-term corporate investment,securities issues exempt from the interest equaliza-tion tax, and bank lending. The latter is also exemptfrom IET to date, of course, and we should not forgetthat bank lending is doubly encouraged by current IETprovisions; they (a) divert capital borrowing fromthe securities market to banks, and (b) encourageanticipatory bank lending activity now. The provisionthat would let the administration apply IET to longerterm bank loans has no retroactive feature. Theresult is a "beat the hoarders" incentive for both thebanks and the borrowers.The question of what Governmental policies toapply is a good one. I feel it would be foolish totighten general monetary policy to reach a handful ofbanks, unless all else fails; and it would be likewisefoolish to trigger general policy changes without firstremoving the specific IET incentive to bank lending byapplying it to banks as authorized by law.(5) Money supply and liquidity. I see no needfor further comment. Allowing for the changinginfluences on money and credit demand outlined by thestaff, I feel that changes in these magnitudes overperiods of months can give useful clues as to whatmonetary policy might be--clues that are not alwaysdependable, and are only a few among a great number ofmeasures the Committee should watch, but which arenonetheless helpful in that context.(6) Money and credit markets. The staff commentsconstitute a useful review. The last paragraph pointsup how important it will be for us to conduct openmarket operations in a way that does not push up memberbank borrowings at this juncture.* * *I am gratified by the calmer atmosphere that hasreturned to domestic financial markets in the past twoweeks--thanks in part to the public admonition of-61- 12/15/64President Johnson. It seems to me that we have comeabout as close as anyone could have hoped--in thisinterval--to achieving a somewhat higher level ofmoney market rates than before the discount rateaction, with a minimal effect on longer term creditavailability.Judging from what we have read and heard in thestaff reports, I would think continued pursuit of thissame objective would be in order until the next meetingof the Committee. Business expansion appearsreasonably based, apart from the steel inventory bulgefor which monetary policy is no apt remedy. Ourbalance of payments picture has not improved as muchas one might have wished, but to deal with thatproblem, particularly in the light of the Britishtrouble, will take careful consideration of a numberof Government policies--not just general monetarypolicy. Indeed, from a credit point of view, theremedial tool needed is not so much a blanket depressantas a scalpel--one that can reach particularly the dozenor so big banks that seem to be generating the bulk ofthe lending abroad. Certainly consideration should begiven to means of neutralizing the positive incentiveto such lending generated by an IET that applies tocapital issues but not yet to banks.In so far as instructions to the Manager areconcerned, I favor his continuing to meet alldemonstrated market needs for reserves. Over the nextmonth, seasonal pressures will be reversing and may bepushing bill rates down, and under the presentcircumstances I would not want the Desk to fight sucha decline, if it happens, by tightening the moneymarket. In particular, I would not want to see bankborrowings pushed back up. I think the moderatelevel of discounting since the last meeting has beena key element in stabilizing market conditions withina reasonable range, and I would not want to seeborrowings rise for very long above the moderate levelsestablished thus far in December.Mr. Robertson noted that alternatives A and B for thesecond paragraph of the directive were identical except for the-62- 12/15/64 -63-order of the clauses. He preferred A, in which the clause orderwas the same as in the previous directive, because a reversal ofthe clauses might prompt questions concerning possible subtleimplications of the change. He agreed with Mr. Shepardson'sremarks about the first paragraph, but would prefer to drop thesecond sentence completely rather than to introduce a substitutefor it. This sentence would not be needed so long as, pursuantto the understanding reached after the last meeting, thedirective itself was linked to the policy record entry for thismeeting, and the entry included the substance of today'sdiscussion of the issues covered by the staff's questions.Accordingly, he thought it would be appropriate to issue adirective consisting simply of the first sentence of the staff'sdraft and the second paragraph.Mr. Mills then made the following statement:During a period disturbed by the difficultiesencountered by the United Kingdom and by the increasein the discount rates of the Federal Reserve Banks,the apparent purpose of Federal Reserve Systemmonetary and credit policy was to attempt to instillconfidence in the financial community by creating abackground of relatively easy money market conditionsintended to indicate that no further policy moves inthe direction of credit restraint would be made.Judging by falling yields on U.S. Government and otherfixed interest obligations, interest rate responses topolicy intentions have been successful.The question is whether current policy has over-reached the necessities of the economic situation andhas resulted in easier money market conditions thanare justified by immediate and prospective developments. 12/15/64The possibility of massive inventory ;tockpiling, thefurther upward movement in the prices of strategicindustrial materials, and pervasive but latent evidencesof inflationary pressures suggest that a somewhat morerestrictive credit policy should be resorted to thanis now the case.A modest reduction in the supply of reserves anda consequent tightening in credit availability wouldstill leave reasonable leeway for appropriate creditexpansion without encouraging the commercial bankingsystem to press unduly for a further increase in itsholdings of loans and investments. A lesser degree ofcredit availability should have the wholesome effect ofrestraining the expansion of credit in a ratherinflammable business atmosphere that could ignite intoanother bout of inflationary conditions. It is notbelieved that a tightening in the supoly of reservesfrom present levels would restrict whatever expansionin credit may be legitimately called for or weakenfinancial confidence in the general domestic andinternational economic picture because of a slightlystronger interest rate structure.Accordingly, the Committee's directive shouldnot press for "maintaining about the same conditionsin the money market that currently prevail" but,instead, should direct the Manager of the System OpenMarket Account to reduce the supply o: free reservesto a point resulting in money market conditions compa-rable to those that were ruling late in November andearly in December.Mr. Mills added that he sensed from the comments of thosewho had spoken thus far that the sentiment of the Committee wasthat there should be no change in policy. He objected to sucha course because he considered it a policy of drift whichignored reasonably predictable developments that to his mindshould be anticipated by appropriate monetary and credit policyactions. He felt that a new start should be made toward moderatelyrestricting the availability of credit. He thought the Committee-64- 12/15/64 -65-was evading the issue by continually describing the course itintended to take but then putting off appropriate policy actions.Mr. Wayne said that one brief observation based on theRichmond Bank's Fifth District survey seemed pertinent since itbore on policies which might affect both employment and prices.Textile and furniture manufacturers, who had been operating topractical capacity for some time, had resorted to furtherlengthening of the workweek to meet heavy celivery schedulesextending well into 1965. There was no evidence of any move toenlarge the work force which would add jobs and thereby increaseemployment.Mr. Wayne then turned to the staff questions.(1) Production, sales, and inventories. With movementsin these sectors mainly seasonal or related to specialsituations--i.e., steel and automobiles--and with no evidence ofany speculative inventory buildup related to price expectations,he thought the Committe's attention should be focused elsewhere.(2) Employment. Mr. Wayne considered the staff analysison this subject to be informative and useful. He concurredgenerally with Mr. Treiber's observations. For the most part,joblessness continued to be concentrated heavily in a few specificage groups and among the unskilled. He had serious doubts thatmonetary policy could do anything further towards relieving that 12/15/64 -66-kind of unemployment without prejudicing its ability to achieveover-all domestic and international stability. It seemed to himthat over the past three years the Committee had contributed aboutas much to the solution of this problem as possible, given thebalance of factors it had to consider.(3) Price developments. Upward pr:..ce pressures stillseemed to Mr. Wayne to be gentle, and while it was difficult tosay whether they were stronger there were no indications thatthey were weaker. They seemed, however, to have become somewhatmore pervasive. In general, while suggesting continued watchful-ness, price pressures did not appear to require action on theCommittee's part.(4) Balance of payments. Mr. Wayne said he wouldpostpone his comment on this subject until after he had consideredthe next two questions.(5) Money supply and liquidity. Mr. Wayne agreed ingeneral with the staff analysis on this subject. He saw no clearindication that either the money supply or bank credit was risingat an unsustainable rate. He was somewhat concerned, however,about the continued large increase in liquid assets. In the lastthree months, time deposits had increased at an annual rate of14.3 per cent and nonbank liquid assets at a rate of 8.0 per cent,and this growth was superimposed on a 4-1/2 per cent annual rate 12/15/64 -67-of rise in the money stock. He was not at all certain what theserates signified, but he was increasingly convinced that theCommittee had to try to interpret them in the light of recentstructural changes in the financial system that had changedsignificantly the relationship of bank reserves to bank creditand the money supply. In other words, while the outcome of therecent changes in Regulation Q had not yet clearly been analyzed,in considering policy the Committee had to take account of thestructural changes that had occurred.The large November increase in bank credit appeared toMr. Wayne to be attributable chiefly to Treasury financing.Money supply growth over the same period actually was somewhatsmaller than :.n other recent months. The step-up in the rate ofexpansion in time and savings deposits might have been due chieflyto the limited availability of automobiles over much of the month.(6) Noney and credit markets. While the staff andothers had suggested that these markets had settled down, itseemed to Mr. Wayne that the adjustments to the recent ratechanges here and abroad were not yet complete. With respect tobank reserve positions, he was not at all sure how they should beexpected to adjust to the new rate alignmert, especially in viewof the strong seasonal pressures in the current picture. In hisjudgment the Desk had done an outstanding job of moderating the 12/15/64 -68-stresses of the adjustment in this difficult seasonal period;Mr. Stone and his staff had conformed as nearly as was humanlypossible to the Committee's instructions. Seasonal swingswould continue to complicate reserve and yield relationshipsin the period ahead and, Mr. Wayne thought had to be takeninto account in evaluating how the adjustment was proceeding.Returning to the balance of payments question, Mr. Waynenoted that Mr. Sanford had emphasized the recessity of "holdingthe line" through the year end and into January to permit thedisposition of seasonal pressures and to allow time for anorderly solution to the problem of the weakness of the pound.Mr. Reynolds' comments were somewhat encouraging with respectto the long run; nevertheless the improvement was relative only,since it followed some very bad years, and it still left theUnited States with a large deficit. In the short run it wasabsolutely essential that the international payments mechanismbe preserved in workable order. That required both the poundand the dollar to remain acceptable currencies. What theCommittee had done in this area had been necessary, but it wasimportant to face squarely the fact that the actions taken hadnot strengthened the dollar except in the negative sense thatthey had averted a disastrous collapse of the payments mechanism.Should the current efforts to bolster and maintain the payments 12/15/64 -69-mechanism prove unsuccessful, the dollar would be exposed todangerous drains which would be accentuated considerably by theSystem's commitments of recent weeks.In the policy area, it seemed to Mr. Wayne that theCommittee had two commitments or obligations which over-rode allothers. The first was to do all that was feasible to facilitatea solution of the British problem and to help the United Kingdomregain a workable equilibrium. Then the Committee had to honorits commitment to make available sufficient reserves so thateconomic expansion in this country would not be curtailed by alack of credit. At present, those two commitments seemed to becompatible but whether they would remain so would depend ondevelopments. If confidence in the pound should be restoredquickly and the discount on forward sterling dropped sharply,and if the British Bank rate remained at its present level, itmight be necessary to raise short-term rates substantially toavert large outflows of funds. While a moderate reduction inthe availability of funds would not be unduly burdensome to thedomestic economy, a large reduction might well be crucial instopping economic expansion. Regardless of internationaldevelopments in the next four weeks, there would be a sharpseasonal reversal of market conditions in this country. In thissituation Mr. Wayne could see no alternative to giving the 12/15/64Manager somewhat more leeway than usual. He favored a continuationof the policy of placing primary emphasis on short-term rates,aiming at about the same range as was adopted two weeks ago--3.75-3.90 per cent. He would not consider this statement of arange of rates to establish terminal points to be defended at allcosts, but rather as a general criterion that he would hope couldbe followed.Mr. Wayne had a slight preference .or alternative B forthe second paragraph of the directive, but he did not consider thedifference between A and B to be sufficiently significant todebate the matter.Mr. Treiber referred to Mr. Wayne's comment regarding thedecisions of textile and furniture manufacturers to extend theworkweek and asked whether the manufacturers had indicated thenature of the thinking behind those decisions.Mr. Wayne replied that the manufacturers had noted onlythat this was their usual practice. In general, they preferredusing trained workers on an overtime basis to expanding theirwork forces by hiring untrained workers, on the ground that itwas less costly in the long run. They were not particularlyconcerned with the questions of over-all employment andunemployment, and felt that if they enlarged their work forcestemporarily they would be faced with problems of industrialrelations when it became necessary to cut them back.-70- 12/15/64Mr. Clay remarked that the practice Mr. Wayne haddescribed seened to be followed rather generally in manufacturing;initially, marufacturers would increase output by workingovertime. If the higher levels of production were sustained,however, they might enlarge their work forces.Mr. Clay then said that there had been some indicationof the preliminary response of Tenth District banks to therecent changes in Regulation Q and the discount rate. Amongcountry banks, the evidence suggested little action on eithercount. In their unhappiness over the modification of RegulationQ, country banks apparently would try to avoid any change in therates they paid on time and savings deposits. With the higherlevel of loan rates that were charged, it was not anticipatedthat the 1/2 per cent change in the discount rate would affectthe terms of country banks' loans.Among city banks, Mr. Clay had noted a tendency, not yetuniform, to move to the 4 per cent ceiling on all maturities ofsavings deposits on which they paid interest. The banks wereglad to get rid of the problems involved in calculating andexplaining the interest payments under the old Regulation Qceilings. In addition, the cost impact was materially lessenedby the large proportion of savings deposits whose maturitiesalready qualified for the 4 per cent rate. On time CDs, the-71- 12/15/64 -72-city banks were endeavoring to hold the line at 4 per cent for6 month maturities and beyond. On nationally marketed CDs, theleadership of New York would force the issue as to what they mustpay when renewals came along if they wished to retain such funds.Mr. Clay said that note cases were being reviewed at citybanks with a view to increasing loan terms on a selective basisas renewals came along. On the strongest rated national companieswith alternative sources of funds, however, the banks apparentlyhad not found it feasible to change loan terms.Before commenting on the staff statement on the questionsprepared for the Committee's consideration, Mr. Clay said it wasin order to inquire whether the statement would be included inthe minutes for this meeting. It seemed necessary to do so ifCommittee members' comments as they appeared in the minutes wereto be meaningful. He thought the staff statement had been wellprepared and was a good evaluation of the economic situation.While different people would approach the preparation of suchstatements in different ways, leading to coments and suggestions,the analysis and conclusions appeared to him to be essentiallycorrect.One comment on question 1, Mr. Clay continued, was theneed for recognition that present evidence suggested a moremoderate rate of increase in business capital outlays than in 1964. 12/15/64Mr. Clay remarked that price developments to date couldnot be characterized as of a kind that called for monetaryrestraint. While price increases from whatever cause had to bewatched carefully, the greatest potential threat and the mostawkward one for monetary policy was the labor contract settlements.The auto settlements were unfortunate, and the steel negotiationswere of tremendous importance. It not only was important thatthe settlements should not be excessive, leading to higher steelprices and the spreading of such labor settlements; it also wasimportant that the steel settlement should come early so as toavoid the destabilizing effect of an inventory boom.Mr. Clay suggested that the issue involved in the interna-tional payments deficit was not whether some people were concernedabout it and others were not. In fact, the staff statement on thissubject, after giving background information and analysis, effec-tively pointed out the difficulties in the concluding paragraph.The difficulties so well stated were uderscored by the indicationin the previous paragraph of the role of private capital outflowsin 1964, including $2 billion of direct investments, $1 billion offoreign security issues, and $1-1/2 billion of bank lending. TheCommittee not only had the question of what monetary policy coulddo in the light of domestic needs; there was the further questionof what part of those capital outflows could be dealt witheffectively through monetary policy.-73- 12/15/64Mr. Clay believed monetary policy over the next fourweeks should continue in its present general framework. Itseemed that interest rates again should be the primary short-runguide, and for that purpose he suggested a 90-day Treasury billrate range of 3.75-3.90 per cent. The staff draft of theeconomic policy directive appeared satisfactory to Mr. Clay and,in keeping with the statement on interest rates as the primaryguide, he considered alternative B preferable for the secondparagraph.Mr. Scanlon turned directly to consideration of the questionsprepared by the staff.(1) Production, sales, and inventories. Mr. Scanlonremarked that although it was difficult to abstract from theeffects of recent and prospective work stoppages, it appeared thatthe pace of business activity had continued to rise. Recent pricedevelopments suggested that the gap between performance andpotential had narrowed further. Nevertheless, such factors asthe buildup in steel inventories (due in part to shortages ofrailroad cars), the unusually high current level of automobileoutput, and projections of smaller increases in spending for newplant and equipment and for construction in 1965, carriedintimations that the present expansion could begin to losemomentum next spring. The Midwest, which had experienced a-74- 12/15/64 -75-somewhat more vigorous expansion than the nation, probably wasmore exposed than the national economy to any reaction that mightoccur in the durables sector, especially steel and automobiles.Important producers of durable goods in the District generallyreported--unofficially--that they were acquiring all the steelthey could.(2) Employment. As viewed in the Seventh District, itseemed unlikely that any significant further reduction in themargin of underutilized manpower would be attainable in the nearfuture even with additional upward pressure on the price structure,especially given prospects for sizable further labor force growth.Only one labor market in the District was reported to have asubstantial labor surplus. It seemed appropriate, however, tomaintain moderate pressure on usable labor supplies both to aidmarket forces tending to alleviate unemployment and to provide afavorable ecoromic setting for programs to upgrade the quality ofcurrent .nd prospective workers and to increase mobility.(3) Price developments. Mr. Scanlon observed that upwardprice movements continued and apparently were still more numerousthan was indicated by the official indexes. He continued toreceive reports of increases in the form of slimmer discountsfrom list prices. The farm and construction machinery industrywas attempting to put through price increases to offset increased 12/15/64 -76-costs resulting from recent wage negotiatiors. Thus far theincreases were selective because markets were not strong enoughto permit across-the-board increases. However, he thought itshould be noted that price adjustments were not all upward.Spokesmen for some firms in the Seventh District offered remindersthat price reductions were still a part of the economic landscape.(4) Balance of payments. Mr. Scanlon observed that viewsin the Seventh District regarding the balance of paymentsparalleled those given by the staff. The nation's balance ofpayments problem showed little indication of changing one way orthe other. While there was no evidence that. the situation hadbeen deteriorating recently, no sign of a turn for the better wasapparent. Several leading Midwest industrial firms that wereimportant exporters and overseas producers recently had projectedappreciable gains in their foreign sales for 1965. Thoseestimates had been made subsequent to the United Kingdom'simposition of additional import taxes. There were hints that suchfirms had undertaken to reduce their exposure to loss from possibledevaluation of foreign currencies.(5) and (6) Money supply and money and credit markets. Onfinancial factors, Mr. Scanlon said, the recent behavior of bankcredit and the money supply had been reasonably consistent withearlier experience in the second half of 1964, the course of 12/15/64 -77-business, repercussions of the discount and Bank rate changes,and implementation of a monetary policy emphasizing an interest-rate target. For those reasons, in his judgment no especialsignificance attached to the pattern of recent short-termfluctuations. The large Chicago banks were increasing rates onsavings deposits under one year effective January 1, and oneadditional bank had issued a small amount of unsecured notes.That bank reported that unsecured notes might be used largely inlieu of repurchase agreements.Owing to the likelihood that credit market adjustments tothe recent discount and Bank rate changes were continuing, itappeared to Mr. Scanlon appropriate to adhere to a short-termrate range as a target for the four weeks ahead. A level between3.70 and 3.90 per cent seemed to be desirable, with reserves,money supply, and credit permitted to respond to market forces.Like Mr. Wayne, Mr. Scanlon would allow the Manager amplelatitude during the period to meet any market pressures as theyoccurred. He preferred alternative B for the second paragraph ofthe directive.Mr. Deming said he did not agree with Mr. Mitchell'sobservation that the System had made a trade-off between balanceof payments and domestic considerations. It seemed obvious tohim that by maintaining stability in long-term interest rates 12/15/64and by permitting the rise in bank credit that had occurred inNovember and December the Committee had continued to serve theneeds of the domestic economy--and perhaps to a greater extentthan they should have been served. While he did not advocate achange in policy at this time, he thought it could be arguedthat a slight curtailment of credit availability would beappropriate now.Mr. Deming said he had no comments to make on questions1, 2, and 6 of the staff's list. With respect to question 3, hecontinued to be somewhat concerned about the accuracy of theofficial price indexes. Perhaps some price declines wereoccurring, but he could find no evidences of them in the NinthDistrict or elsewhere. For the past three months the survey thatthe Minneapol.s Bank made of firms with headquarters in the Districthad disclosed price increases but no reductions.Mr. Deming also continued to be concerned about the balanceof payments, considered under question 4. There was some comfort,but not a great deal, in the fact that the record would be betterthis year than last year. It appeared that the deficit wouldremain large for some time. Capital outflows continued heavy,and even if banks should curtail foreign lending their surplus offunds might lead them to make unsound domestic loans.-78- 12/15/64 -79-With respect to banking developments discussed underquestion 5, Mr. Deming remarked that banks in the Ninth Districthad shown somewhat less deposit expansion in November than hadoccurred naticnally. Nevertheless, deposits were continuing toexpand rather rapidly, and District banks were not in aparticularly tight position. Their liquidity ratios showedlittle change over the past year.Mr. Deming thought the Committee should continue itsrecent policy without substantial change over the next fourweeks. He preferred alternative B for the second paragraph ofthe directive. He thought the phrase in the first paragraphthat read "the continued domestic expansion, currently receivingadditional stimulus from recent and threatened work stoppages"needed some elaboration; it might be desirable to insert thewords "and perhaps unsustainable" between "additional" and"stimulus." However, he agreed with Mr. Robertson that thesecond sentence of the first paragraph would best be omitted inits entirety.Mr. Swan commented that the Twelfth District continuedto be faced with a larger decline in defense-related employmentthan nationally, a higher rate of unemployment, and greaterweakness in residential construction. However, recentdevelopments did not appear to reflect other differences ofsignificance for the national economy. 12/15/64 -80-Mr. Swan said that in commenting on the staff questions andanswers he would avoid repeating points that already had been made.He had no disagreement with the staff analysis under question 1,relating to the general course of economic activity in the immediatefuture. But he agreed with those who, in looking a little furtherahead, had emphasized the possibility of some reaction to thecurrent accumulations of automobiles and steel. Given certaincircumstances, these accumulations could come to an end ratherabruptly, with some reaction on the rest of the economy. Perhapsthey would end in the first part of next year at a time when therewas continuing weakness in housing and a shift to surplus in theposition of the Federal budget, and when consumers wereexperiencing the effects of settlements on their 1964 Federalincome taxes. In light of these possibilities he thought therewas some question about the course of events in 1965.On the subject of unemployment, Mr. Swan agreed with thosewho felt that to a large extent the problem was a structural oneand not susceptible to monetary policy. The one qualification hewould make was that recently the most rapid and sustained growthin employment had been in trade, services, and State and localgovernments--areas in which a substantial amount of the work donedid not require a high order of labor skills--and there might besome latitude for further expansion in employment in such areas 12/15/64 -81-as a result of expansion in aggregate demand. It had to berecognized that such labor resources were the types that weremost likely to be augmented by continued expansion of the laborforce; this was an area in which it was necessary to keeprunning in order to stay in one place.On the balance of payments, Mr. Swan thought that Mr.Reynolds' remarks about the outlook for the trade surplussimply highlighted the Committee's concern over the matter ofcapital outflows. In this connection, he found the availabledata on the amounts and directions of various types of flows tobe rather inadequate and somewhat confusing. For example, thereseemed to be some conflict with respect to the size of recentshort-term outflows between Mr. Treiber's statement on thissubject and Mr. Robertson's, which was based on the staffanswer to question 4. If possible given the limitations of thebasic data, he thought it would be desirable to get some furtherbreakdowns in the figures, distinguishing not only betweenshort- and long-term flows and among direct investments, newforeign security issues, and bank loans, but also between flowsthat were and were not subject to the interest equalization tax;and providing some indications of geographical distribution. Herealized that this would be a difficult task, but thought thatsome further refinement of the figures would be greatly welcomed. 12/15/64 -82-Mr. Reynolds commented that the conflict to whichMr. Swan had referred was apparent rather than real, andresulted from a different grouping of the figures. In thestaff statement to which Mr. Robertson had referred, short-term and long-term foreign lending by banks had been combined,but this total had been distinguished from flows of liquid funds;whereas Mr. Treiber, in referring to large short-term capitaloutflows, had included in this category short-term bank creditas well as flows of liquid funds.Mr. Swan said this was the kind of question on whichthe Committee needed better information, both in weighingbalance of payments considerations against the needs of thedomestic economy and in evaluating the alternatives of generalmonetary policy and selective measures of some type for dealingwith the problem of the deficit.Mr. Swan indicated that he had no quarrel with the recentmovements in bank reserves and the mory supply. It seemed tohim that the Desk had done an excellent job recently, givenactual market developments and the policy decision made at theprevious meeting. In view of the uncertainties existing atpresent, the adjustments still in process, the likelihood of aTreasury financing, and the uncertainties--in his own mind atleast--about the longer-run business outlook, he thought the 12/15/64 -83-Committee should maintain much the same policy and the samemoney market conditions in the next four weeks as recently.He would add only that he felt the Committee should begin torelate its target range for short-term rates to expected marketconditions. Given the anticipated shift in seasonal factors, hewould agree with Mr. Mitchell that the range could be lowered abit, perhaps to 3.70-3.85 per cent.With respect to the directive, Mr. Swan agreed that thephrase in the first paragraph on which Mr. Deming had commentedwas not entirely clear. However, instead of describing thestimulus from work stoppages as "additional and perhapsunsustainable," he would prefer to describe it as "temporary."Before today's meeting, he had concluded that he mildly favoredalternative B for the second paragraph. However, his view hadchanged after hearing Mr. Robertson's comments on this subject.He now thought the Committee should maintain the same order ofclauses if it was continuing the same policy; there was notenough justification for reversing the clauses to warrantpromoting speculation as to why the clause order had beenchanged.Mr. Irons reported that there was little in recentEleventh District developments that was worth comment today. Hewould note only that there had been increasing use of the higher 12/15/64 -84-interest rates now allowed on savings deposits underRegulation Q. Enough banks had already moved up to the 4per cent rate on savings deposits to make it likely thatother banks would soon follow. This was true not only amongthe larger banks but also among some of medium and smallersize.The national business situation seemed to Mr. Ironsto be one of strength with no particularly unbalanced factors,although the wage, cost, and inventory situations warrantedclose watching.With respect to the questions submitted by the staff,Mr. Irons said that in the interest of avoiding repetition hewould note only that his position was substantially the same asMr. Treiber's. He thought the Committee should continue thepolicy it had followed in the past two weeks. Market developmentsin that period generally had been satisfactory and the Desk haddone a good job of carrying out its instructions. He wouldcontinue to have the Desk place emphasis on interest rates andtreat free re:;erves as a residual. He favored 3.75-3.90 per centas a general range for the three-month bill rate and agreed thatthe expected market situation required giving the Account Managera good deal of leeway. The Desk was likely to have problems inthe period ahead in coping with international, seasonal, and otherdevelopments. 12/15/64 -85-Mr. Irons did not have any strong preference betweenalternatives A and B for the second paragraph of the directive.However, he thought alternative B might be desirable because itplaced somewhat more emphasis on the international aspect of theproblem.Mr. Ellis commented that there had been no newdevelopments of economic significance in the New England regionduring the past two weeks. The recent episode with respect tothe prime rate at a Boston bank had led him to believe that inthe future the prime rate might be downgraded in importance asan element of the interest rate structure. The banks at presentwere searching for alternative techniques for setting rates onterm loans, and it was possible that there might never again beprime rate announcements.In reacting to the first question submitted by the staff,Mr. Ellis said, he would note the statement in the "green book'-that in the Commerce-SEC survey actual third-quarter capitalexpenditures had been revised upward from expected outlays. Thissounded much like what had happened last year. He, for one,found it difficult to reconcile the survey results with statementsof concern that plant and equipment outlays might rise too little1/ The report, "Current Economic and Financial Conditions,"prepared for the Committee by the Board's staff. 12/15/64 -86-in 1965. He would expect that in the longer run stable economicgrowth was likely to be associated with a lower rate ofexpansion in capital spending than had been experienced recently.The current inventory bubble raised in his mind the question offinancing. The present easy availability of credit made it easyto finance that inventory accumulation, and so the Committee perhapshad to assume some responsibility for it.The discussion of employment in the staff's reply toquestion 2 was informative, Mr. Ellis said, but most of theanalysis was directed to the matter of a possible near-termreduction in unemployment. In his judgment it would be moreappropriate to aim monetary policy at the target of increasingemployment and reducing unemployment in the longer run; he wouldnot direct policy primarily to techniques for lowering unemploymentin the short-run.With respect to price developments, Mr. Ellis noted thatin its response to question 3 the staff said that "Industrialcommodities as a group rose only slightly further in November andearly December, following the October advance." Alternatively,they might have written simply that industrial commodity pricesas a group rose in October, November, and early December. Thestaff's construction seemed to reflect a tendency to explainaway the rise. 12/15/64 -87-Mr. Ellis had no disagreement with what was said in thestaff comments on the balance of payments under question 4.However, he thought a distinction should be made betweenavailability and cost, and he noted that while the Committeehad made some move on the cost side it could not, in his opinion,escape responsibility on the availability side for the largevolume of ban. lending to foreigners. Banks had been able tomake foreign loans at the recent rate because the Committee hadsupplied the necessary reserves.On the money supply and liquidity question, Mr. Ellisnoted that the second table in the green book offered the basisfor an analysis on a three-month basis. It seemed to him thatthere had been some shift in the last seve:al months. In thethree months ending with November, total bank loans and invest-ments as well as business loans had increased at about a 9-1/2per cent annual rate, in both cases not very different from thegrowth rate for the last 12 months. But banks seemed to bereaching out in other areas; the rise in holdings of "other"securities, for example, was 15 per cent in the three-monthperiod, compared with less than 12 per cent in the last year.As long as the Committee had a policy setting an interest-ratetarget and of supplying reserves at the initiative of themarket, banks would continue to reach out in this way, using 12/15/64 -88-the reserves that would be supplied. Total reserves hadincreased at a 5.1 per cent rate in the last three months, andMr. Ellis found it hard to accept that rate as a "moderate"one, especially when it was higher than the rate that hadprevailed before August.Turning to the money mar:et and the directive, Mr. Ellisnoted that Mr. Partee had urged the Committee to refer toneither interest rates nor reserves, but rather to desiredmarket conditions, in setting its policy targets for the nextfour weeks. Mr. Ellis said he frankly was at a loss as to how"currently prevailing conditions in the mor.ey market" might bedefined. The Manager had reported that the, substantial volumeof securities purchased by the Desk immediately after theprevious meeting had contributed to an improvement in themarket atmosphere. In effect, without a reserve target theCommittee had put bill rates down 10 basis points then, and laterrates gradually had edged up again. The Manager also had toldthe Committee this morning that New York banks were flush withreserves. Were those the conditions the Committee would besuggesting in the directive should be maintained?Mr. Ellis said he sympathized with the problem Mr. Millshad in understanding the policy that had been followed since thepreceding meeting in light of the language of the directive that 12/15/64 -89-had been issued then. He noted that at th.t meeting theCommittee had agreed to use an interest rate target and hadagreed on a specific range for the bill rate, but then haddecided not to say so in the directive. This morning it hadbeen noted that alternatives A and B for the second paragraphcontained the same two instructions, and differed only in theorder of the clauses. He would suggest that the two goalsgiven in both alternatives were not consistent. He agreedwith Mr. Shepardson's suggestion that if alternative B wasadopted the last clause should be omitted. But he urged theCommittee to consider element 4 of the trial directive as asubstitute for B; to his mind it was a clear statement of theCommittee's intent at present.Mr. Swan referred to Mr. Ellis' renarks on the excessreserve situation at New York banks and said that he had under-stood from an earlier comment of Mr. Stone's that this situationhad now changed.Mr. Stone said that Mr. Swan's understanding was correct.As of yesterday, the basic reserve position of New York bankswas negative and they would be making large loans to dealerstoday, the tax date. The banks had worked themselves into abasic position of excess reserves to be able to meet expecteddemands, and those demands now were converging on them. 12/15/64 -90-Mr. Balderston remarked that he was quite pleased withthe list of questions the staff had prepared and with the repliesthey had submitted to the Committee in advance of this meeting.He would make two comments. With respect to question 4, regardingthe balance of payments, he thought that the $7-1/2 billion tradesurplus realized in the last few months had resulted in part fromthe threat of a longshoremen's strike, a threat that was not yetover. The Committee could not count on so large a trade surplusin the future; the surplus was more likely to be about $6 billionthan $7-1/2 billion.Mr. Balderston's second comment related to question 1.In his opinion, the adverse effects of strikes and threatenedstrikes were particularly serious when they occurred in the steelindustry; because of the importance of steel in the economy,these effects ramified widely. Last week he had heard one analystobserve that from 1937 to date every steel strike or strike threathad had adverse effects on the whole economy.Mr. Balderston's own concern continued to center onliquidity, which appeared to him to be sufficiently great atpresent to foster some excesses at home and to stimulate banklending abroad. Noting that short- and long-term foreign loansof banks would be $1-1/2 billion this year, he observed that bankswould accommodate foreign borrowers less willingly if liquidity 12/15/64 -91-were reduced. He emphasized that it was not only large banksthat were involved; some foreign borrowers were solicitingfunds from banks of varying size throughout the country.Now that the System had accommodated seasonal needsthis fall and faced a return flow of some S900 million inreserves in January, Mr. Balderston thought it was especiallyimportant to keep in mind Mr. Mills' admonition to the effectthat it was overly easy for the Committee to conclude at meetingafter meeting that the status quo was the best policy. His ownfeeling two weeks ago had been that the status quo was the bestsolution them, to permit the dust to settle after the officialrate actions and other events. But the four-week period aheadwas one in which strikes threatened and in which the foreignsituation was likely to continue to be turbulent. He thoughtthe time might have come for the Committee to tighten--graduallyand carefully, but nevertheless to tighten.Mr. Balderston said he was unhappy with the proposalsfor the directive which, he noted, were in the usual form. Hecertainly subscribed to Mr. Shepardson's suggestion that thelast clause of alternative B should be dropped, but even withthis change neither A nor B meant very much to him; he could notvisualize just what they instructed the Desk to do. He wouldprefer to use language taken from the trial directive, as 12/15/64proposed by Mr. Ellis. On the assumption that the policyrecord entry for this meeting would reflect the substance oftoday's discussion of the staff's questions, he recommended abrief directive consisting of the following language drawn fromthe trial directive:In the light of the economic and financialdevelopments reviewed at this meeting, it remainsthe current objective of the Federal Open MarketCommittee to accommodate moderate further growthin bank credit and the money supply.To implement this policy, and recognizing thatinternational uncertainties and year-end seasonalpressures require a larger than usual degree offlexibility in operations, System open marketoperations over the next four weeks shall beconducted with a view to accommodating seasonalchanges in reserve needs and to moderating anytendency for the 3-month Treasury bill to movebelow 3.75 or above 3.90 per cent.In concluding, Mr. Balderston said that he subscribed ingeneral to Mr. Ellis' comments. He thought the new approach tothe go-around that had been used today was an excellent one.Chairman Martin recalled that at the preceding meetinghe had agreed with a view expressed by Mr. Balderston that theCommittee should never be complacent. However, recently he hadreviewed the Committee's minutes for the past year and he couldnot help but feel a sense of satisfaction with the course ofmonetary policy in 1964. Not all of the Committee's goals hadbeen achieved and perhaps each member, if acting alone, would-92- 12/15/64 -93-have done things somewhat differently. Nevertheless, in hisjudgment the decisions of the Committee had been good, and hethought that the members could well be pleased with them. Healso was happy that it was unnecessary to question the motivesof any of the people who sat around the table. All were seekingthe right answers to difficult problems. He thought theseanswers could not be put in precise terms; if the Committeetried to get too precise it might be asking for trouble.This last meeting of the year seemed to be an appropriateoccasion to make these observations, the Chairman remarked. Hedid not mean to imply that the System was organized perfectly,but he did think that on the whole the Committee had done wellthis year.Chairman Martin did not agree with Mr. Mitchell'ssuggestion that the Committee had made a trade-off betweendomestic and international objectives. He thought that recentlythe two had come together in terms of the policy appropriate tothem, as they did periodically.In the Chairman's opinion the next four weeks wouldcover a period for which it was extremely difficult to assessthe likely course of developments in the economy. He thoughtthe Committee should not now move toward either greater tightnessor greater ease, but it should try to maintain essentially the 12/15/64 -94-same posture for policy. Perhaps the Committee might decide atits next meeting to make some overt policy change but the presentseemed to him to be a good time to pause.The Committee's consensus evidently was for no change inpolicy at this. time, the Chairman continued, although there mightbe dissents from such a decision. A rather wide variety ofsuggestions had been made for the directive. Personally, hefound the staff's draft for the first paragraph acceptable,although some modification might be made in individual phrases;and he could accept either alternative for the second paragraph.At the same time, Mr. Balderston's suggestion for a directive hadconsiderable appeal.Mr. Hickman commented that Mr. Balderston's proposal forthe first paragraph amounted essentially to omitting theexplanatory material from the staff's draft, and this struck himas a good idea,Mr. Shepardson said that he was completely in accord withthe proposal for omitting this explanatory statement entirely.His earlier suggestions for revision had reflected a belief thatif such a statement was to be included in the directive thelanguage proposed by the staff should be modified.Mr. Mitchell commented that Mr. Balderston's suggestionfor the first paragraph would be particularly appropriate if the 12/15/64 -95-substance of today's go-around was integrated with the directivein the policy record entry for this meeting. For the secondparagraph, however, he would prefer to use the complete text ofelement 4 of the trial directive, rather than to omit the lastpart. Specifically, he would replace the final period inMr. Balderston's proposed text with a semi-colon, and add thislanguage:provided that the bill rate shall be permitted tomove below or above this range to moderate any per-sistent tendency for bank credit to contract morethan seasonally, or to moderate any sharpacceleration in short-term capital outflows inresponse to widening international interest ratedifferentials.Mr. Wayne said he had no objection to Mr. Balderston'sproposed first paragraph. However, he would object to theproposed second paragraph, because it included a statement of arange for the bill rate. It seemed to him that the last meetingof the year was the worst possible time to begin usingquantified instructions in the directive. Moreover, at thepreceding meeting there had been fairly general agreement thatthe Committee should not quantify its instructions until it haddiscussed the question of quantification on its merits.Mr. Ellis suggested that it might be possible to make theinstruction more specific and still avoid explicit quantificationby calling for bill rates in the range prevailing during the past 12/15/64 -96-few weeks. Mr. Wayne commented that he would prefer to haveany references to the bill rate confined to the text of thepolicy record entry for this meeting, and not included in thedirective itself.Mr. Shuford remarked that Mr. Wayne's position seemedto him to be consistent with the Committee's conclusion at theprevious meeting.Mr. Robertson proposed that the first paragraph of thedirective consist of the opening sentence of element 3 of thetrial directive, and that the second paragraph consist ofalternative B with the last clause omitted. Several membersconcurred in this proposal.In the course of further discussion it was suggestedthat the first paragraph should be based on certain languagetaken from element 3 of the trial directive and from the staff'sdraft for the regular directive.Thereupon, upon motion duly madeand seconded, the Federal Reserve Bankof New York was authorized and directed,until otherwise directed by the Committee,to execute transactions in the SystemAccount in accordance with the followingcurrent economic policy directive:In light of the economic and financial developmentsreviewed at this meeting, it remains the Federal OpenMarket Committee's current policy to facilitatecontinued expansion of the economy by accommodatingmoderate growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and 12/15/64 -97-the money supply, while seeking to avoid the emergenceof inflationary pressures and to strengthen theinternational position of the dollar.To implement this policy, and recognizing thatinternational uncertainties and year-end seasonalpressures continue to require a larger than usualdegree of flexibility in operations, System openmarket operations shall be conducted with a view tomaintaining about the same conditions in the moneymarket as currently prevail.Votes for this action: Messrs.Martin, Balderston, Hickman, Mitchell,Robertson, Shepardson, Shuford, Swan,Wayne, and Treiber. Vote against thisaction: Mr. Mills.Mr. ills said that he dissented from this action forreasons given in the statement he had made earlier in themeeting.Chairman Martin then called for an expression of viewson Mr. Clay's suggestion that the question.; and responsesprepared by the staff for today's meeting be incorporated inthe minutes. There was general agreement with this suggestion.It also was agreed that the substance of these staffmaterials, and of the members' views on them as expressed in thego-around, should be included in the policy record entry. Inthis connection, Mr. Mitchell said it would be helpful if adraft entry was available in advance of the next meeting.Mr. Young observed that the entry for today's meeting would bemore difficult to draft than usually was the case but that thestaff would endeavor to comply with Mr. Mitchell's suggestion. 12/15/64 -98-It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committeewould be held on Tuesday, January 12, 1965, at 9:30 a.m. TheChairman proposed that Committee members plan to devote theafternoon of that day, after adjournment of the meeting, to ageneral discussion of the desirability of quantification in theCommittee's directives. No objections were made to this proposal.Thereupon the meeting adjourned.Secretary Attachment ACONFIDENTIAL (FR) December 14, 1964Draft language for current economic policy directive for considerationby the Federal Open Market Committee at its meeting on December 15, 1966.First ParagraphIt is the Federal Open Market Committee's current policyto facilitate continued expansion of the economy by accommodatingmoderate growth in the reserve base, bank credit, and the moneysupply, while seeking to avoid the emergence of inflationarypressures and to strengthen the international position of thedollar. This policy takes into account the effects on the dollarof market uncertainties about the pound sterling and thepersistence of sizable deficit in the U.S. balance of payments:the continued domestic expansion, currently receiving additionalstimulus from recent and threatened work stoppages; thepersistent margin of underutilized manpower; the upward drift ofprices for selected industrial commodities; and the continuedexpansion of bank credit and money.Second ParagraphAlternative ATo implement this policy, and recognizing that internationaluncertainties and year-end seasonal pressures continue to require alarger than usual degree of flexibility in operations, System openmarket operations shall be conducted with a view to accommodatingmoderate expansion in aggregate bank reserves, while maintainingabout the same conditions in the money market as currently prevail. -2-Alternative BTo implement this policy, and recognizing thatinternational uncertainties and year-end seasonal pressurescontinue to require a larger than usual degree of flexibilityin operations, System open market operations shall be conductedwith a view to maintaining about the same conditions in the moneymarket as currently prevail, while accommodating moderateexpansion in aggregate bank reserves.