 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Systemin Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, June 7, 1966, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Martin, ChairmanBrimmerClayDaane¹IronsMaiselMitchellRobertsonShepardsonScanlon, Alternate for Mr. HickmanTreiber, Alternate for Mr. HayesWayne, Alternate for Mr. BoppMr. Swan, Alternate Member of the Federal OpenMarket CommitteeMessrs. Ellis, Patterson, and Galusha, Presidentsof the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Atlanta,and Minneapolis, respectivelyMr. Holland, SecretaryMr. Sherman, Assistant SecretaryMr. Kenyon, Assistant SecretaryMr. Broida, Assistant SecretaryMr. Molony, Assistant SecretaryMr. Hackley, General CounselMr. Brill, EconomistMessrs. Eastburn, Green, Koch, Mann, Partee,Tow, and Young, Associate EconomistsMr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market AccountMr. Coombs, Special Manager, System Open MarketAccountMr. Cardon, Legislative Counsel, Board of GovernorsMr. Fauver, Assistant to the Board, Board ofGovernorsMr. Williams, Adviser, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of Governors1/ Left the meeting at the point indicated in these minutes. 6/7/66 -2-Mr. Reynolds, Adviser, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMr. Axilrod, Associate Adviser, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMiss Eaton, General Assistant, Office of theSecretary, Board of GovernorsMr. Forrestal, Senior Attorney, Legal Division,Board of GovernorsMessrs. Hilkert, MacDonald, and Lewis, FirstVice Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banksof Philadelphia, Cleveland, and St. Louis,respectivelyMessrs. Eisenmenger, Link, Ratchford, Brandt,Baughman, Jones, and Craven, Vice Presidentsof the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston,New York, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago,St. Louis, and San Francisco, respectivelyMr. Meek, Manager, Securities Department,Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkMr. Kareken, Consultant, Federal Reserve Bank ofMinneapolisUpon motion duly made and seconded,and by unanimous vote, the minutes ofthe meeting of the Federal Open MarketCommittee held on May 10, 1966 were approved.Before this meeting there had been distributed to the membersof the Committee a report from the Special Manager of the SystemOpen Market Account on foreign exchange market conditions and onOpen Market Account and Treasury operations in foreign currenciesfor the period May 10 through June 1, 1966, and a supplemental reportfor June 2 through 6, 1966. Copies of these reports have been placedin the files of the Committee.In comments supplementing the written reports, Mr. Coombssaid the Treasury gold stock would remain unchanged this week. The 6/7/66 -3-Stabilization Fund had acquired $50 million in gold from Canada,which increased its holdings to nearly $100 million, but that entireamount seemed likely to be used up over the next few weeks by a saleof $75 million to France, plus other miscellaneous sales. Consequently,it probably would be necessary to show another reduction in the goldstock of $75 or $100 million before midyear. The way things weregoing, it would not be surprising if the gold stock declined belowthe $13 billion level by year-end. In fact, recent balance of paymentstrends suggested that might occur sooner rather than later.On the London gold market, Mr. Coombs said, demand had beenrestrained by the very tight money market conditions prevailingthroughout world financial markets. Nevertheless, the resources ofthe gold pool had been drawn down by $94 million since the beginningof the year, and there seemed to be a growing impression that theRussians might be able to hold off selling until the latter part ofthe year. The situation in that market remained dangerous; seriousspeculative pressures could materialize from one day to the next.During the past two days, for example, there had been a wave ofspeculative buying apparently arising out of the British maritimestrike and the devaluation of the Indian rupee.On the exchanges, Mr. Coombs continued, at the beginning ofMay the Bank of England paid off month-end swaps totaling $100 millionwith the U.S. Treasury and the German Federal Bank, and in the course 6/7/66 -4-of the month it paid off another $50 million of short-term centralbank credit to the Bank for International Settlements. In addition tosuch debt repayments of $150 million, the Bank of England sufferedfurther reserve losses of about $100 million and thus at month-endwas down a total $250 million. Their published reserve statisticsshowed the true loss of $106 million as of the month-end; theremaining $150 million, reflecting central bank debt repayments, wasrefinanced by new borrowings of $50 million from the System under thestandby swap line and $100 million from the U.S. Treasury on a one-dayswap. May was the third month in succession in which the publishedfigures had shown Britain's actual reserve loss, with drawings oncredit lines limited to refinancing central bank debt.The main feature in the sterling market, of course, had beenthe effects of the maritime strike, Mr. Coombs commented. Althoughnegotiations seemed to be more or less on dead center at the moment,the market had been sustained by the hope that the British Governmentmight finally be taking a firm line against a continuation of thewage-price spiral. Meanwhile, however, the payments deficit wasdeepening as exports were choked off, and the longer the strikecontinued the greater the danger of a new speculative outburst. Infact, developments of the last few days might reflect the beginningsof a speculative drive. The Bank of England had allowed the rate todrift down in response to selling pressure, and yesterday the rate 6/7/66 -5-went through the $2.79 level which had been firmly defended lastsummer. This morning it was $2.7884. On Friday the British lost$50 million of reserves; on Monday somewhat more than $100 million;and thus far today about $50 million. The New York market had beenquiet on Friday and Monday but there was some indication that sellingmight now develop--the market had been alerted to the fact that therewas a problem and might react accordingly.With respect to other markets, Mr. Coombs continued, theearlier capital outflows from Switzerland had reversed themselves asthe Swiss market had tightened, and the Swiss National Bank had takenin $135 million during the past few weeks. That inflow had increasedthe Bank's uncovered dollar holdings to a level $70 million in excessof their usual ceiling, and further large inflows might occur inconnection with window-dressing operations in Switzerland at the endof June. Accordingly, it might be necessary for the System to drawupon the Swiss franc swap line before long. Also, he anticipated verysizable dollar accruals by the Bank of Italy during the summer touristseason, which might necessitate drawing upon the lira swap line again.In response to a question by Mr. Mitchell, Mr. Coombs saidthat Britain had not received assistance from central banks otherthan the Federal Reserve during the past month. At the end of Maythey considered the possibility of attempting to raise some fundsfrom the Italians, Swiss, and Germans. They decided against thatcourse, however, on the grounds that it might muddy the waters at 6/7/66 -6-a time when agreement on the new sterling balance credit packageappeared close. Instead, they drew on the System and U.S. Treasury.If their reserves were still down at the end of June, which seemedlikely, and if the sterling package was approved, the British probablywould draw on the new credit lines, with parallel drawings on the U.S.equaling 31 per cent of the total.Thereupon, upon motion duly madeand seconded, and by unanimous vote,the System open market transactions inforeign currencies during the periodMay 10 through June 6, 1966, wereapproved, ratified, and confirmed.Mr. Coombs then recommended renewal of a $50 million drawingon the swap facility with the National Bank of Belgium, which wouldmature on June 22. As the Committee would recall, the arrangementwith the Belgium Bank was unique in that it provided for that $50million to be fully drawn at all times, with renewals at six-monthintervals. There was no use of the swap line at present in the senseof disbursements from the amount drawn.In response to questions, Mr. Coombs indicated that whilethe drawing in question was for six months, the underlying swapagreement had a term of twelve months. He had not been able topersuade the Belgians to change the terms of the agreement to conformto those of the System's other swap arrangements, which were whollyon a standby basis until activated by three-month drawings. 6/7/66Renewal of the drawing on the swaparrangement with the National Bank ofBelgium, for a further period of sixmonths, was noted without objection.Chairman Martin then noted that on June 3 Mr. Coombs haddistributed a memorandum to the Committee concerning the Baslenegotiations on the British sterling balance credit package aswell as copies of the final draft of the agreement itself, andhe asked Mr. Coombs to comment on the negotiations.1/Mr. Coombs observed that, as the Committee knew, it hadbeen hoped for some time that it might be possible for the UnitedKingdom to negotiate a swap network similar to the System's whichwould assure that other central banks would join the U.S. inproviding support in the event of a sterling crisis, making itunnecessary to rely on last-inute negotiations. The Committeewould recall that the November 1964 package of credit assistancewas for a six-month period, and that it was not renewed at theexpiration date. Thus, in the summer of 1965 the Bank of Englandwas dependent entirely upon the Federal Reserve and the U.S. Treasuryfor any necessary credits. Efforts had been underway since last fallto develop a supplementary British network with central banks underwhich credits would be made available for any purpose.1/ Copies of the documents referred to have been placed inthe Committee's files. 6/7/66The new package that had been negotiated went only part waytoward that objective, Mr. Coombs said. Partly as a result of therecord of the continuing problems of sterling over the past twentymonths, the attitudes of the European central banks toward sterlinghad hardened. They had taken the line that they would be willingto make credits available to the Bank of England but only to protectsterling against drains resulting from its role as a reserve currency--i.e., drains occasioned by liquidation of foreign-held sterlingbalances. They were not prepared to offer assured financing forother purposes. In effect, they would underwrite the institutionalrole of sterling but not Britain's balance of payments deficits. Staffat the New York Bank and at the U.S. Treasury thought that those termswere undesirably restrictive, but they--as well as the Bank of Englandpeople--were persuaded that the choice was between such arrangementsor none at all.Mr. Coombs saw one advantage to the nature of the arrangements--the link to a long-run problem increased the likelihood that theywould be renewed at maturity. And whatever restrictions might bewritten into the agreement, in the event of a real crisis theEuropean central banks were likely to permit use of the credits formore general purposes. There would be a real advantage in havingthe credit lines in being, even if under terms that limited theiruse. The agreement would not exclude other special ad hoc creditsthat might be arranged if circumstances justified them. 6/7/66In conclusion, Mr. Coombs noted that with the latest turnin the sterling situation the System had a real interest in seeingthe agreement adopted. The British were likely to have to draw oncredit lines in some volume, and existence of the new arrangementswould substantially reduce the amounts they would have to draw onthe U.S. Treasury and the Federal Reserve. As he had mentioned,the U.S. share under the package would be 31 per cent. At the Baslemeeting next weekend Mr. Hayes presumably would be expected toindicate whether or not the proposed arrangements were acceptableto the Federal Reserve, and he (Mr. Coombs) recommended that theCommittee note them without objection.Chairman Martin observed that the negotiations in questionhad been going on for some time, and he suggested that the Committeemembers raise any questions they had concerning the proposed agreement.Mr. Mitchell asked whether there was any doubt as to whetherthe sterling credit package would be approved, and whether the totalamount of credits it provided for, which Mr. Coombs' memorandumindicated was $1 billion, was likely to prove adequate to the fore-seeable need.Mr. Coombs replied that it was his impression that theEuropeans, as well as the Canadians and Japanese, had decided to goalong with the package, but he could not say whether recent sterlingdevelopments would change their attitudes. The British might findthemselves subject to a certain amount of questioning when the 6/7/66 -10-agreement came up for approval at Basle on June 11-12. As to theadequacy of the package, it was quite unlikely that the Britishwould lose $1 billion of reserves in a single month. It was truethat they had lost $500 million in a few days in November 1964, butat that time foreign sterling balances were much larger than theywere now. He would hope they could get through the month of Junewith the European credit lines available. There was no question butthat the attitudes of the Europeans had hardened with respect toassisting the British, and he was afraid that some of that hardeningalso was beginning to be reflected in their attitudes toward theUnited States.In response to questions by Messrs. Brimmer and Ellis, Mr. Coombsindicated that the duration of the propsed standby arrangements wasnine months, with three-month renewable drawings. There was a provisionthat all swaps would be terminated by mid-June, 1967, to accommodatedrawings made at the end of the term of the standby arrangements. Nonew credit extensions by the U.S. were involved; the $1 billion totalwas made up of $75 million from the BIS, $525 million channeled throughthe BIS by the participating central banks, and parallel arrangementsinvolving a new $90 million facility with the Bank of France and anearmarking of $310 million of the existing U.S. credit lines to theBritish for proportionate use along with drawings on the other centralbanks. The U.S. lines, of course, consisted of the $750 million swap 6/7/66 -11-arrangement with the System, which had been renewed for anothertwelve-month term on May 31, 1966, and the $400 million authorizedby the Committee and the U.S. Treasury in September 1965. Thequestion of the source of any U.K. reserve loss--and thus theavailability of the new credits as a means of financing the loss--would be left to the judgment of the British but, of course, at thefollowing meeting in Basle they would be expected to defend theirjudgments with data on changes in sterling balances. It was his hopethat interpretations in that connection would be reasonably flexible.Mr. Irons asked whether the earmarked portion of the U.S.lines would be increased by $90 million if the French decided notto extend a new facility to the British.Mr. Coombs replied that he would recommend against such aprocedure. It would be better to have the total package cut back to$910 million if the French did not participate. Of course, if theother central banks agreed to increase their contributions theearmarked part of the U.S. lines might be increased proportionately.Mr. Galusha asked whether there were indications that theBritish would adopt policies that would effectively restrain theirwage-price spiral.Mr. Coombs responded that the British authorities obviouslywere working on that problem, although he did not know what particularmeasures they were considering. A great deal of pressure was converging 6/7/66 -12-on them to take effective steps, and conceivably something mightbe done by the United States to encourage them further. It was hisopinion that they were under no illusions with respect to theseriousness of the situation.Thereupon, the proposed newsterling balance credit arrangementswere noted without objection.Mr. Ellis then remarked that it had been about a year sincethe Committee had last discussed the possibility of negotiatingreciprocal currency arrangements with Venezuela and Mexico. Thosetwo countries had made substantial progress in improving theirfinancial positions and he asked whether the Committee should notconsider the question again.In response to the Chairman's request for comment, Mr. Coombssaid the main development in the area since the Committee's earlierdiscussion was that the U.S. Treasury had negotiated swap arrangementswith the central banks of Venezuela and Mexico. It would be useful tolearn what the Treasury's experience had been under those arrangements,and whether the Treasury intended to maintain the relationships ormight prefer to have the Federal Reserve share in them. To his mind,however, the key question was whether negotiation of swap lineswith the two countries would expose the System to pressures forsimilar arrangements with other countries in Latin America that werein less strong positions. If there was some basis on which a clear 6/7/66 -13-line could be drawn separating Venezuela and Mexico from the rest ofLatin America, a good case might be made for having swap lines withthe two countries. If not, the System might be well advised not toenter into such arrangements. In any case, he thought a study wouldbe useful.Chairman Martin agreed that such a study should be made.The Chairman then suggested that the Committee consider furtherthe proposed new instruments governing foreign currency operations thathad been discussed at the past several meetings. He asked Mr. Hollandto comment on the memorandum on the subject distributed by theSecretariat on June 1, 1966.1/Mr. Holland said that on the basis of the discussion at themeeting of the Committee on May 10 and subsequent conversations withMr. Mitchell, the staff had recommended a revision of paragraph 2(B)of the proposed new foreign currency directive distributed on April 28,1966. In addition, the staff had noted a possible alternative revisionin which the second sentence of paragraph 2(B) would be deleted and anew paragraph 5 added. The revision recommended in 2(B) was as follows:B. To temper and smooth out abrupt changes in spotexchange rates, and to moderate forward premiums anddiscounts judged to be disequilibrating. Whenever supplyor demand persists in influencing exchange rates in onedirection, System transactions shall be modified, OR1/ A copy of this memorandum has been placed in the Committee'sfiles. 6/7/66 -14-curtailed, [DEL: or eventually discontinued pending a] UNLESSUPON REVIEW AND reassessment OF THE SITUATION by theCommittee [DEL: of supply and demand forces] DIRECTS OTHERWISE;Mr. Treiber remarked that the provisions of paragraph 2(B)represented a statement of general principles relating to conditionsunder which operations in foreign currencies should be undertaken.In his judgment the language of the paragraph contained in the staff'sApril 28 draft was more appropriate than the new language now suggested.Mr. Daane noted that his view was similar to Mr. Treiber's.He did not think any useful purpose would be accomplished by thesuggested change and if adopted he would be concerned about thepossibility of adverse reactions when the new language was published.Mr. Mitchell commented that he felt the proposed revision ofparagraph 2(B) did not involve a substantive change. He thought thatit did involve an improvement in language, and that the Committee hadnothing to lose by adopting it. In his judgment, however, the principalissue concerned the possible new paragraph 5 noted in the Secretariat'smemorandum. That paragraph read as follows:5. The System's foreign currency operations are notdesigned to counter the effects of basic and persistenteconomic forces on flows of international payments or onmovements of exchange rates. Operations undertaken todeal with forces deemed temporary or transitional shallbe modified or curtailed, unless upon review and reassess-ment of the situation the Committee directs otherwise, ifthe forces persist (a) for six months, or (b) for a lesserperiod if the Special Manager concludes that they can nolonger be considered temporary. 6/7/66 -15-In Mr. Mitchell's opinion that suggested paragraph reflected aposition that the Committee should take publicly, and he recommendedits addition to the directive.Mr. Daane agreed that the suggestion to add the new paragraph5 represented the more important issue, but observed that there weredifferences in judgment concerning it. In his opinion, to whateverdegree the paragraph would affect the flexibility of operations itwould work in the wrong direction, and he did not think it should beadopted.Mr. Treiber concurred in Mr. Daane's view. It was highlydifficult, he said, to distinguish between forces that were temporaryand transitional, on the one hand, and those that were basic andpersistent, on the other; the duration of particular forces oftenwould depend on the actions of the Governments involved. It had beenthe practice of the Committee to review all credit extensions everythree months and to get the judgments of the Special Manager concerningthem at those times. It seemed to him that the workability of thepresent arrangements had been demonstrated and he preferred them tothose that would be called for under the suggested paragraph 5.Mr. Coombs agreed that the key issue concerned the proposedparagraph 5; the language revision suggested in paragraph 2(B) wasa subsidiary issue. He would note first that foreign central bankshad primary responsibility for influencing the exchange rates of 6/7/66 -16-their currencies against the dollar. The System could intervene inthe exchange markets, but it did so only in rather extreme circumstances.The only two occasions on which strong actions had been taken toinfluence exchange rates were at the times of the Cuban crisis andof the assassination of President Kennedy. In sum, he thought theCommittee need not be overly concerned about possible efforts by theAccount Management to influence exchange rates.Thus, Mr. Coombs continued, the issue to which the proposedparagraph 5 was essentially directed was the duration of swapdrawings. He agreed with Mr. Treiber that there was a certain ambiguityin terms such as "temporary" and "persistent" because the nature ofGovernmental policy was decisive in determining whether particularforces lasted two months or twenty. At the outset of a particulardevelopment it often would be impossible to predict its duration. Thereal question was how much breathing space should be provided foreffective Governmental actions to deal with the development. Thegeneral policy of the Committee, which he thought was a proper one,was to allow a six-month breathing space, and to become progressivelymore concerned if drawings stayed on the books for a longer period.Preparations were made to shift to some other form of financing asdrawings approached a six-month term. Some 94 per cent of alldrawings had been repaid within six months and none had gone on formore than a year. 6/7/66 -17-Mr. Mitchell remarked that he thought the paragraph inquestion said essentially what Mr. Coombs had been saying. TheCommittee should be prepared to defend itself against critics byindicating in the directive that it was not trying to rig marketswhen there were basic forces at work that should be dealt with byappropriate Government policies. If, for example, it appeared thatsome foreign country's basic situation was deteriorating, theresponsibility for deciding whether to offer support should liewith the Committee rather than with the Special Manager. Theproposed paragraph said, in effect, that the Committee should makethe decision in such cases.Mr. Shepardson observed that he did not read the proposedlanguage to call for a determination at the outset that a particulardevelopment was temporary.Mr. Coombs said that the opening phrase of the second sentence--"Operations undertaken to deal with forces deemed temporary ortransitional"--conveyed such an implication to him. In a typical case,however, some central bank in the swap network might take in asubstantial volume of dollars in a short period and suggest that theSystem absorb those dollars by a swap drawing, as an alternative toa gold sale. It was appropriate, he thought, to make the drawing toabsorb the initial impact of the development and then to study thesituation to determine whether it reflected a temporary phenomenon. 6/7/66 -18-It was his practice to report to the Committee before renewingcentral bank drawings at the end of their three-month terms.Mr. Mitchell commented that the procedure Mr. Coombsdescribed was much like that followed when a domestic bank cameto the discount window; the Reserve Bank accommodated the bankautomatically and then studied the situation. The fact thatMr. Coombs reported to the Committee on proposed renewals ofdrawings seemed to him to have nothing to do with the matter atissue, which concerned publishing a statement of the principle underwhich the Committee operated.Mr. Robertson indicated that he shared Mr. Mitchell's position.Mr. Coombs remarked that if the proposed paragraph appearedin print it could be used against the United States by foreigncountries who might ask, for example, why the U.S. was still employingshort-term credit facilities when its balance of payments deficit hadpersisted for nine years. Borrowing as well as lending by the U.S.was involved, and he would hope that the Committee could preserve areasonable degree of flexibility for dealing with possible develop-ments. By way of illustration, he recalled that early in 1966 Systemcredits to the Bank of England were reaching the end of their six-month terms. In the immediately preceding period the System putconsiderable pressure on the British to pay off their drawings. Thatwas rather difficult for them because it required liquidation of a 6/7/66 -19-large part of their portfolio of U.S. securities. Under othercircumstances he could visualize the U.S. having to borrow and--ifthe suggested language was adopted and published--being pressed byforeign central banks to clear up its debt within a certain timeand under certain conditions that could prove to be highly inconven-ient. Hence, he would not recommend hardening the requirement thatcredits be kept short and repaid within some specific period such assix months. He thought there should be a general understanding withinthe Committee to that effect, but if the Committee could avoid printingsuch a rule it would be in a better position to deal with possibleemergencies in which some departure from general rules might bedesirable.Mr. Daane referred to the final clause of the proposedparagraph, which read, "or for a lesser period if the Special Managerconcludes that they can no longer be considered temporary." In hisjudgment that clause imposed an unreasonable burden on the SpecialManager. Moreover, the Europeans were extremely sensitive withrespect to the short-term nature of swap drawings, and to adopt theparagraph would simply give them more ammunition to use against theUnited States. If, as he believed, the Committee had adhered tothe principle that the swap arrangements were short-term creditfacilities and had maintained proper surveillance over their use,he saw no reason to change the directive. To do so, in his opinion.would be hurtful rather than helpful. 6/7/66 -20-Mr. Mitchell replied that the purpose of the proposedparagraph was to set forth the practice the Committee had in factfollowed so that the public would be aware of it. He thought thepoint was not adequately stated in the record.Mr. Ellis said he had found that academicians tended to relyon the Committee's published instruments for an understanding of theobjectives of its foreign currency operations. He had some sympathyfor the proposed paragraph because it provided a clearer descriptionof the nature of the forces with which the Committee was attemptingto deal. It was true that one could not know at the outset of adevelopment whether it would prove temporary but whether or notoperations were continued would depend on a subsequent judgment onthat point.Chairman Martin remarked that he thought the Committee wasdealing largely with questions of intentions and language. Mr. Mitchellwas correct in noting that the suggested paragraph described theCommittee's general policy, and there was merit in Mr. Ellis' pointregarding academicians. It was difficult, however, to formulatesuch a policy statement in precise terms and he was not persuadedthat it was necessary to incorporate the paragraph.Mr. Wayne noted that the network of swap arrangements had beendeveloped originally primarily because of problems with respect tointernational payments of the United States, and that the proposed 6/7/66 -21-paragraph would apply to drawings by the U.S. as well as by the otherparties to the arrangements. He thought those facts warranted carefulconsideration, and he wondered whether the Committee ought to put theproposed paragraph into the directive. He personally had been impressedby the points Mr. Coombs had made today.Mr. Mitchell remarked that he considered odd the argumentthat the Committee should do the right thing in limiting the durationof swap drawings but at the same time it should avoid saying it wasdoing the right thing. The Committee did in fact extend swap drawingsbeyond six months only with great reluctance, and it did look to morebasic policy measures to deal with persistent problems. The proposedparagraph specified exactly what the Committee had been doing.Chairman Martin observed that in view of the differences ofopinion expressed today the Committee probably would not want to changethe substance of the directive unless it was convinced that the changeinvolved an improvement. He then suggested that the Committee membersindicate whether or not they favored adding the proposed paragraph.Messrs. Mitchell, Robertson, and Shepardson noted that they did andthe other members indicated that they did not.Chairman Martin then asked whether there would be any objectionto incorporating the revisions in paragraph 2(B) recommended by thestaff in its June 1 memorandum, and no objections were heard. 6/7/66 -22-The Chairman then observed that, as indicated in theSecretariat's memorandum of June 6, 1966, Mr. Swan had offeredsome suggestions for change in the language of the proposed authoriza-tion and the proposed directive.1/ He invited Mr. Swan to comment.Mr. Swan said his suggestion for the authorization involvedsome small changes in wording in paragraph 1B(2) that he thought wereclarifying, as follows:(2) ADDITIONAL [DEL: other] currencies held spot orpurchased forward, up to the amount necessary forSystem operations to exert a market influence BUT[DEL: and] not exceeding $150 million equivalent; andHis suggestion for the directive was simply to omit from the list ofpurposes of System foreign currency operations the statement inparagraph 1(B), which read "To aid in making the system of inter-national payments more efficient." The meaning of that statement,taken by itself, was not clear to him, and unintended implicationsmight be read into it. The intended meaning seemed to be coveredadequately by paragraphs 1(C) and 1(D).Mr. Treiber said he thought the System's operations didcontribute to the efficiency of the international payments systemby making additional sources of credit available. The statement in1(B) of the directive had been included in the Committee's existingauthorization for some time and he would prefer to retain it in thenew directive.1/ A copy of the memorandum referred to has been placed in theCommittee's files. 6/7/66Mr. Daane remarked that the revision in the proposed authoriza-tion that Mr. Swan had suggested seemed to be an improvement. Heagreed with Mr. Treiber, however, that it would be desirable toretain paragraph 1(B) of the directive, noting that the forthcomingreport of the Deputies of the Group of Ten would make a statementalong the same lines.Chairman Martin proposed that the Committee accept Mr. Swan'ssuggested revisions in paragraph 1(B)(2) of the proposed authorizationbut not his suggestion for the directive, and no objections were heard.Thereupon, upon motion duly madeand seconded, and by unanimous vote, theCommittee replaced its previously existinginstruments governing foreign currencyoperations, namely, the authorizationregarding open market transactions inforeign currencies, the guidelines forSystem foreign currency operations, andthe continuing authority directive withrespect to foreign currency operations,with two new instruments, namely, anauthorization for System foreign currencyoperations and a foreign currency directive,reading as follows:AUTHORIZATION FOR SYSTEM FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizesand directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, for SystemOpen Market Account, to the extent necessary to carry outthe Committee's foreign currency directive:A. To purchase and sell the following foreigncurrencies in the form of cable transfers through spotor forward transactions on the open market at home andabroad, including transactions with the U.S. StabilizationFund established by Section 10 of the Gold Reserve Actof 1934, with foreign monetary authorities, and with theBank for International Settlements:-23- 6/7/66Austrian schillingsBelgian francsCanadian dollarsPounds sterlingFrench francsGerman marksItalian lireJapanese yenNetherlands guildersSwedish kronorSwiss francsB. To hold foreign currencies listed inparagraph A above, up to the following limits:(1) Currencies held spot or purchasedforward, up to the amounts necessary to fulfilloutstanding forward commitments;(2) Additional currencies held spotor purchased forward, up to the amount necessaryfor System operations to exert a market influencebut not exceeding $150 million equivalent; and(3) Sterling purchased on a coveredor guaranteed basis in terms of the dollar, underagreement with the Bank of England, up to $200million equivalent.C. To have outstanding forward commitmentsundertaken under paragraph A above to deliver foreigncurrencies, up to the following limits:(1) Commitments to deliver to theStabilization Fund foreign currencies in which theUnited States Treasury has outstanding indebtedness,up to $200 million equivalent;(2) Commitments to deliver Italianlire, under special arrangements with the Bank ofItaly, up to $500 million equivalent; and(3) Other forward commitments todeliver foreign currencies, up to $275 millionequivalent.D. To draw foreign currencies and to permitforeign banks to draw dollars under the reciprocal currencyarrangements listed in paragraph 2 below, provided thatdrawings by either party to any such arrangement shall be-24- 6/7/66fully liquidated within 12 months after any amountoutstanding at that time was first drawn, unless theCommittee, because of exceptional circumstances,specifically authorizes a delay.2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs theFederal Reserve Bank of New York to maintain reciprocalcurrency arrangements ("swap" arrangements) for SystemOpen Market Account with the following foreign banks,which are among those designated by the Board of Governorsof the Federal Reserve System under Section 214.5 ofRegulation N, Relations with Foreign Banks and Bankers,and with the approval of the Committee to renew sucharrangements on maturity:Amount ofArrangement(millions of Period ofdollars ArrangementForeign Bank equivalent) (months)Austrian National Bank 50 12National Bank of Belgium 100 12Bank of Canada 250 12Bank of England 750 12Bank of France 100 3German Federal Bank 250 6Bank of Italy 450 12Bank of Japan 250 12Netherlands Bank 100 3Bank of Sweden 50 12Swiss National Bank 150 6Bank for International Settlements(System drawings in Swiss francs) 150 6Bank for International Settlements(System drawings in authorizedEuropean currencies other thanSwiss francs) 150 63. All transactions in foreign currencies undertakenunder paragraph 1(A) above shall be at prevailing market ratesand no attempt shall be made to establish rates that appear tobe out of line with underlying market forces. Insofar as ispracticable, foreign currencies shall be purchased throughspot transactions when rates for those currencies are at or-25- 6/7/66below par and sold through spot transactions when suchrates are at or above par, except when transactions atother rates (i) are specifically authorized by theCommittee, (ii) are necessary to acquire currencies tomeet System commitments, or (iii) are necessary to acquirecurrencies for the Stabilization Fund, provided that thesecurrencies are resold forward to the Stabilization Fundat the same rate.4. It shall be the practice to arrange withforeign central banks for the coordination of foreigncurrency transactions. In making operating arrangementswith foreign central banks on System holdings of foreigncurrencies, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York shallnot commit itself to maintain any specific balance, unlessauthorized by the Federal Open Market Committee. Anyagreements or understandings concerning the administrationof the accounts maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank ofNew York with the foreign banks designated by the Board ofGovernors under Section 214.5 of Regulation N shall bereferred for review and approval to the Committee.5. Foreign currency holdings shall be investedinsofar as practicable, considering needs for minimumworking balances. Such investments shall be in accordancewith Section 14(e) of the Federal Reserve Act.6. A Subcommittee consisting of the Chairman andthe Vice Chairman of the Committee and the Vice Chairman ofthe Board of Governors (or in the absence of the Chairmanor of the Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors themembers of the Board designated by the Chairman as alternates,and in the absence of the Vice Chairman of the Committee hisalternate) is authorized to act on behalf of the Committeewhen it is necessary to enable the Federal Reserve Bank ofNew York to engage in foreign currency operations beforethe Committee can be consulted. All actions taken by theSubcommittee under this paragraph shall be reported promptlyto the Committee.7. The Chairman (and in his absence the ViceChairman of the Committee, and in the absence of both, theVice Chairman of the Board of Governors) is authorized:-26- 6/7/66A. With the approval of the Committee,to enter into any needed agreement or understandingwith the Secretary of the Treasury about the divisionof responsibility for foreign currency operationsbetween the System and the Secretary;B. To keep the Secretary of the Treasuryfully advised concerning System foreign currencyoperations, and to consult with the Secretary onsuch policy matters as may relate to the Secretary'sresponsibilities; andC. From time to time, to transmitappropriate reports and information to the NationalAdvisory Council on International Monetary andFinancial Policies.8. Staff officers of the Committee are authorizedto transmit pertinent information on System foreign currencyoperations to appropriate officials of the Treasury Depart-ment.9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participatein the foreign currenty operations for System Account inaccordance with paragraph 3 G (1) of the Board of Governors'Statement of Procedure with Respect to Foreign Relationshipsof Federal Reserve Banks dated January 1, 1944.10. The Special Manager of the System Open MarketAccount for foreign currency operations shall keep theCommittee informed on conditions in foreign exchange marketsand on transactions he has made and shall render suchreports as the Committee may specify.FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE1. The basic purposes of System operations inforeign currencies are:A. To help safeguard the value of thedollar in international exchange markets;B. To aid in making the system ofinternational payments more efficient;C. To further monetary cooperationwith central banks of other countries having-27- 6/7/66convertible currencies, with the InternationalMonetary Fund, and with other internationalpayments institutions;D. To help insure that marketmovements in exchange rates, within the limitsstated in the International Monetary FundAgreement or established by central bankpractices, reflect the interaction of under-lying economic forces and thus serve asefficient guides to current financial decisions,private and public; andE. To facilitate growth ininternational liquidity in accordance withthe needs of an expanding world economy.2. Unless otherwise expressly authorized bythe Federal Open Market Committee, System operations inforeign currencies shall be undertaken only when necessary:A. To cushion or moderate fluctuationsin the flows of international payments, if suchfluctuations (1) are deemed to reflect transitionalmarket unsettlement or other temporary forces andtherefore are expected to be reversed in the fore-seeable future; and (2) are deemed to be disequilibratingor otherwise to have potentially destabilizing effectson U.S. or foreign official reserves or on exchangemarkets, for example, by occasioning market anxieties,undesirable speculative activity, or excessive leadsand lags in international payments;B. To temper and smooth out abrupt changesin spot exchange rates, and to moderate forward premiumsand discounts judged to be disequilibrating. Wheneversupply or demand persists in influencing exchange ratesin one direction, System transactions should bemodified or curtailed unless upon review and reassessmentof the situation the Committee directs otherwise;C. To aid in avoiding disorderly conditionsin exchange markets. Special factors that might makefor exchange market instabilities include (1) responsesto short-run increases in international political tension,-28- 6/7/66(2) differences in phasing of internationaleconomic activity that give rise to unusuallylarge interest rate differentials between majormarkets, and (3) market rumors of a characterlikely to stimulate speculative transactions.Whenever exchange market instability threatensto produce disorderly conditions, Systemtransactions may be undertaken if the SpecialManager reaches a judgment that they may helpto reestablish supply and demand balance ata level more consistent with the prevailingflow of underlying payments. In such cases,the Special Manager shall consult as soon aspracticable with the Committee or, in anemergency, with the members of the Subcommitteedesignated for that purpose in paragraph 6of the Authorization for System foreigncurrency operations; andD. To adjust System balances withinthe limits established in the Authorization forSystem foreign currency operations in light ofprobable future needs for currencies.3. System drawings under the swap arrangementsare appropriate when necessary to obtain foreign currenciesfor the purposes stated in paragraph 2 above.4. Unless otherwise expressly authorized bythe Committee, transactions in forward exchange, eitheroutright or in conjunction with spot transactions, maybe undertaken only (i) to prevent forward premiums ordiscounts from giving rise to disequilibrating movementsof short-term funds; (ii) to minimize speculativedisturbances; (iii) to supplement existing marketsupplies of forward cover, directly or indirectly, as ameans of encouraging the retention or accumulation ofdollar holdings by private foreign holders; (iv) toallow greater flexibility in covering System or Treasurycommitments, including commitments under swap arrange-ments; (v) to facilitate the use of one currency for thesettlement of System or Treasury commitments denominatedin other currencies; and (vi) to provide cover forSystem holdings of foreign currencies.-29- Before this meeting there had been distributed to themembers of the Committee a report from the Manager of the SystemOpen Market Account covering open market operations in U.S.Government securities and bankers' acceptances for the period May 10through June 1, 1966, and a supplemental report for June 2 through6, 1966. Copies of both reports have been placed in the files ofthe Committee.In supplementation of the written reports, Mr. Holmescommented as follows:The Committee directive adopted at the last meetinghas, I believe, generated a constructive dialogue withinthe System on the nature of staff reserve projectionsand their use in helping to shape day-to-day open marketoperations. Over the recent period, actual results havebeen in line with the staff estimates of a reversal duringMay of the sharp increases in aggregate reserves that hadoccurred in April. In fact, over most of the periodrequired reserves tended to fall a bit short of theestimates, suggesting no need to speed up the processof attaining gradual reduction in net reserve availability.Thus, net borrowed reserves and borrowings from theReserve Banks each increased by about $50 million in theweekly averages.I believe most of the staff would agree that we needmuch more work and experience before a judgment can bereached about the effectiveness of permitting short-runfluctuations in aggregate reserve measures to influencethe course of open market operations between Committeemeetings. June, for example, may prove a more difficultmonth than May because of the uncertainties spelled outin the blue book.1/ The changed pattern of tax payments,the problems that face the thrift institutions as they1/ The report, "Money Market and Reserve Relationships," preparedfor the Committee by the Board's staff.6/7/66-30- 6/7/66come into their midyear interest payment period, andthe continued pressure of Government agency financingare all factors to be reckoned with in coming weeks.With bank reserve positions under greater pressure,the Federal funds rate has moved into new high ground.Last Friday the effective rate reached 5-1/4 per cent,and offerings at 5-3/8 per cent made their appearancefor the first time. The funds rate continues to beinfluenced by CD and other short-term money rates, andby the desire of many banks to avoid borrowing at thediscount window. The discount rate is exerting littleinfluence. Given the taut reserve situation, banks havetended to manage their positions cautiously, with con-siderable pressure in the funds market and heavy borrowingbefore the weekend a typical, but not exclusive, pattern.Over the long Memorial Day weekend borrowing from theReserve Banks exceeded $1 billion, and very largeexcesses were built up, particularly at New York Citybanks. In fact, the New York City banks ended thatstatement week with more than $0.5 billion in surplusreserves, even though country banks took advantage ofthe break in the Federal funds rate to accumulate $1.3billion in excess reserves on Wednesday to carry overinto the final week of their statement period or toresell on subsequent days to their sophisticated citycousins at higher rates.Rates on bankers' acceptances, finance paper,commercial paper, and short-term agency issues, anddealer financing rates have all pushed into new highground over the period. Treasury bills, on the otherhand, have been on a course of their own despite dealerfinancing rates that have touched as high as 5-5/8 percent. Strong demand from corporations and public funds,together with System buying and the investment in billsby investors seeking a liquidity haven until the courseof long-term rates becomes clearer, has pressed on marketsupplies. In yesterday's auction, average rates of 4.57and 4.74 on three- and six-month bills, respectively,were established.At these levels, however, dealers were cautious intheir bidding and there was an unusually wide spreadbetween the average price bid and the lowest price acceptedby the Treasury. 6/7/66A heavy atmosphere pervaded the capital markets formost of the period as investors were choosy in the lightof the growing calendar, and only very attractively pricedissues were well received. The corporate market was underparticularly heavy pressure, with yields on both new andoutstanding issues pushing into new high ground. Someimprovement in atmosphere occurred late in the period whena triple-A telephone issue with 5-year call protectionpriced to yield 5.45 per cent--nearly 30 basis pointsabove yields on a comparable issue a month ago--was wellreceived. The weakness in the corporate market adverselyinfluenced the market for Treasury notes and bonds, asdid the diminishing expectations of a tax increase andSecretary Fowler's remarks about the possibility of somerevision of the 4-1/4 interest rate ceiling. Despitethese developments, there was a considerable body ofsentiment in the Government market that the February-Marchinterest rate peaks might be tested, but that rates mightbe in the process of bottoming out. Uncertainties aboutthe future course of monetary and fiscal policy togetherwith Congressional and Administration expressions of concernabout the competitive position of the savings and loanassociations and the mutual savings banks have tended toproduce an air of caution but no firm sense of directionin the Government bond market.In the meantime, the relentless pressure of newofferings has created a number of problems in the marketfor Government agency issues. Prices have given groundand it has become increasingly difficult to place eachsucceeding new issue in investors' hands. On Thursday,FNMA will be pricing an offering of $350 million SmallBusiness Administration participation certificates maturingin 1-5 years and $180 million of their own new participationcertificates maturing in 13-15 years. Current market talkis for a 5.70 -5.75 rate on the shorter issues, withunderwriters having only moderate success in lining up buyerseven at these rates. For the longer maturities there appearsto be good demand at a 5-3/8 -5.40 per cent yield range.The very high rates on shorter agency issues is becoming amatter of increasing concern to the Administration, but isthe natural outcome of the crowded calendar of issues thathas been forced into the market. Given the continuedpressure on bank reserve positions, the coming weeks--whichinclude the dividend and tax dates, a substantial calendar ofGovernment agency, corporate, and municipal offerings,-32- 6/7/66 -33-possible Congressional action on CD rates, the midyearinterest payment period for savings and loan associa-tions and mutual saving banks, and the current pressureon sterling mentioned by Mr. Coombs--will provide aconsiderable test for both the money and capital markets.Mr. Swan asked whether the Manager expected the large disparitybetween the bill rate and other short-term rates to continue indef-initely or whether he thought bill rates would advance and narrow thegap.Mr. Holmes replied that at current levels of other short-termrates there was an air of caution about the bill rate, as evidencedin yesterday's auction. It was hard to forecast bill rates atpresent because of uncertainties about the volume of funds seekinghavens in bills. It was known, for example, that some corporationswere instructing their treasurers to place funds only in bills, andif that continued it could keep rates depressed for some time. Hewould imagine, however, that with all of the other pressures existingin short-term markets bill rates would move up sooner or later.Mr. Mitchell noted that System purchases had contributed todownward pressures on bill rates, and asked whether the Desk shouldnot be buying other types of securities. For example, would it bedesirable for the Committee to authorize purchases of agency issues?Mr. Holmes agreed that System purchases had contributed tothe recent downward pressure on bill rates, although he thought suchpurchases were not the main factor. As to trading in other securities,the Desk had bought coupon issues from time to time. There were a 6/7/66 -34-number of problems connected with buying agency issues. Firstwas the legal question of the System's authority to buy particulartypes of issues. Secondly, there were difficulties relating to theissues themselves; most were small and were not tradable on anyscale. Third, what might be called an "even keel" problem existed.Five or six agency issues might be offered in a single month, aswell as issues of the new participation certificates, and therewas likely to be a serious risk of giving false signals to the marketby trading in them. Both purchases and sales by the System couldaffect rate expectations and operations might have an undesirablylarge influence on the market. Finally, the present period, withthe crowded agency calendar and with the problems being encounteredin pricing some issues, would be a difficult one in which to beginoperations in agencies.In response to a question by Mr. Mitchell as to whether theCommittee should consider operating in commercial paper, Mr. Holmesreplied that the System could, of course, trade in any obligationsauthorized by law if that served its purposes. He would not wantto make an off-hand judgment on the desirability of trading incommercial paper; the question warranted careful study.Mr. Mitchell then asked what was known about the sources offunds that were being invested in agency issues. 6/7/66 -35-Mr. Holmes replied the dealers handling such issues had madegood progress in broadening the market, although further broadeningwould be desirable. Recent participants included corporations andfinancial institutions such as savings banks and commercial banks.Good strides also had been made in interesting pension and trustfunds as well as other institutional investors, and there had beensome foreign buying.Mr. Mitchell then referred to the draft directives1/ the staffhad prepared for this meeting, particularly to the phrase in alternativeA for the second paragraph reading "provided, however, that if requiredreserves expand sharply more than seasonally expected ...." Heasked how the Manager would interpret that phrase.Mr. Holmes said the first problem would be to specify whatwas seasonally expected in June. Seasonal factors based on experienceof prior years would be of only limited usefulness this year becauseof the changed pattern of tax payments. As the blue book indicated,the Board's staff expected the daily average bank credit proxy to beabout 6-1/2 per cent higher, at an annual rate, in June than in May,and bank credit to rise about 10 per cent from the end of May to theend of June. The New York Bank staff was projecting increases of7-1/2 and 15 per cent respectively, in the two series. Those1/ Appended to these minutes as Attachment A. 6/7/66 -36-differences reflected the degree of uncertainty in expecta-tions.Mr. Daane noted that the blue book indicated that adeepening in net borrowed reserves beyond $400 million couldlead to pressure on the discount rate and Regulation Q ceilings.He asked whether the Manager thought there was much room left toreduce net reserve availability further without forcing anincrease in the discount rate.Mr. Holmes replied that, while it was difficult to judgehow much such room existed, he did not think it was very much inview of the many pressures in the market. He was inclined toagree that net borrowed reserves consistently deeper than $400million would affect expectations and might lead the market toconclude that a change in the discount rate was inevitable. Thatwas a personal judgment, of course, and one that might be changedby developments.Thereupon, upon motionduly made and seconded, and byunanimous vote, the open markettransactions in Government securi-ties and bankers' acceptances duringthe period May 10 through June 6,1966, were approved, ratified, andconfirmed.Chairman Martin called at this point for the staff economicand financial reports, supplementing the written reports that had been distributed prior to the meeting, copies of which have beenplaced in the files of the Committee.Mr. Brill made the following statement on economicconditions:My predecessor in this job, Mr. Noyes, wasalways a source of sage advice. But the soundestof his counsel was a parting message to me, warningagainst the perennial risk of overstaying a tightmonetary policy.I have taken this message to heart and searchedeach nugget of information for signs of economicweakening that should trigger a change in policy.The slowdown in auto sales beginning in Aprilcaused my antennae to quiver, and their vibrationsintensified with news of the drop in new orders,the further cutbacks in auto production, and thereports of housing construction grinding to a halt.They shook violently when the May rise in theunemployment rate was reported.What does it add up to? Is the economyreally slowing down? I think the answer to thisis a qualified yes. Is the Fed overstaying itstightening? I think the answer to this is anunqualified no.Let me elaborate on this paradox, firstgiving some reasons for qualifying the answer onthe state of the economy. The weak spot in cur-rent economic activity is autos. Soon residentialconstruction will be in this category, but, at themoment, the slowdown in activity and spending islargely limited to the auto sector. It's showingup in a variety of economic indicators, however,and followers of driblets of economic intelligencehave a tendency to add these fragments, rather thanto question whether they often are multiple reflec-tions of the same phenomenon. For example, autosaccount for the April-May drop in retail sales,the May drop in the workweek, and the second-quarterslowing in GNP. If one abstracts from autos, retailsales in May continued to rise as rapidly as earlier,the workweek stayed at its postwar peak, and the6/7/66-37- 6/7/66second-quarter rise in GNP is proceeding as fast asthat in the first quarter.One has to be cautious, therefore, to avoidgoing overboard about the auto slowdown, particularlywhen consumer anticipation surveys suggest thepossibility of some rebound in auto sales laterthis year, and particularly because consumerscurrently are showing no signs of keeping theirwallets closed with respect to other types ofspending. Appliance and furniture sales have beenvery strong, and consumer purchases of nondurablegoods continue to rise steadily.Buttressing consumer spending plans in themonths ahead is the scheduled introduction ofMedicare payments at midyear, and the likely risein Federal civilian and military pay. Even ifauto sales do no better than level off at currentrates--a more pessimistic outlook, indeed, thanthat held by most observers--the rise in otherconsumer spending should keep businessmen happywith their plans for new plant and additionalstocks.On the other hand, the housing dip liesahead of us. Housing activity currently isbeing maintained on the basis of financialcommitments made earlier. Judging from ReserveBank reports on new commitment flows, we shouldexpect the residential construction figures toslide more rapidly and by autumn to show adecided reduction. Some temporary relief maybe afforded by an enlarged FNMA purchase program,if Congress appropriates the funds, and bypossible actions to limit commercial bankinvasion of savings and loan fund sources.But short of a major shift in the posture ofpolicy, or an unexpected decline in other creditdemands, housing will probably turn out to be amuch weaker area of activity over the balance ofthis year than our current worry--automobiles.Now let's turn to some of the bright spots(depending upon what one construes as a goodomen these days). The new plant and equipmentsurvey shows no indication of a cutback inbusiness capital outlays. True, during boomswe have gotten accustomed to expecting business-38- 6/7/66spending plans to rise in successive surveys,and the fact that the two most recent surveysare not far from the February reading suggestssomewhat less than usual ebullience, cyclicallyadjusted. Perhaps monetary restraint is havingsome effect--along with Presidential exhortations,delivery delays, and rising machinery prices andconstruction costs. But before chalking up plantand equipment as another victim of tight money,let's keep in mind that at close to midyear,business plans call for plant spending to remaina driving force for economic expansion over thenext two quarters.One always hesitates to go out on a limbabout so volatile an area as business inventories,but at the moment it's hard to see this as amajor drag on the economy. Some involuntaryaccumulation of auto stocks at dealers is inprocess, but these should be worked off duringthe model changeover period. Outside of autos,inventory-sales ratios continue low and favorableto maintenance of the recent pace of inventoryinvestment.Hovering over all judgments as to the economicfuture is the question of defense spending. TheJanuary Budget Message implied a pattern fordefense spending of a fast rise in the first quarter,a slowing in the second quarter, and an abruptleveling off after midyear. Such an abrupt changein the defense tempo would undoubtedly give privatespending plans a jolt, but it appears unlikely todevelop. Not that we as yet have any definiteclues on the course of military needs. Butpiecing together the available information onnew defense orders and on draft calls, it seemsmore likely that defense spending will continueto rise next quarter at least as rapidly as ithas in the current quarter.Adding this to the prospects for privatespending noted earlier, and abstracting fromthe possibility of a financial crisis stemmingfrom the situation with respect to savings andloan associations, one comes up with a pictureof a still-strong economy, one in which realoutput would be rising less rapidly than in 6/7/66the first half of the year, but with resource usesufficiently intense to maintain pressure on costsand prices. Even with capacity continuing to grow,manufacturing plant would continue to be usedintensively--a 92 per cent rate is our guess forthe third quarter. With unemployment amongexperienced workers continuing at rockbottomlevels, wages would likely continue to drift upand productivity to drift down, and, as a result,unit labor costs to rise further. In the contextof continuing strong over-all demand, it wouldnot be surprising if these cost increases werepassed through into rising prices. It's hardfor me to see any significant slackening inthe rate of advance in industrial prices over thesummer and fall.In time, we might expect a deceleration indefense spending, substantial growth in industrialcapacity, and the training of new workers--allfactors favoring a return to price stability.Unfortunately, neither the domestic nor theinternational situation affords the time to permitnatural forces to work their way through the economy.Important wage contract negotiations begin thissummer and carry through next year; the price andprofits background surrounding these negotiationswill not be conducive to moderate settlements.Monetary policy may be a poor tool to use toward off a cost-push inflation threat, but inthe absence of more efficient restraints, itdoesn't seem to me that the Fed can abdicate itsresponsibilities. Indeed, if it weren't for thefinancial market conditions Mr. Axilrod will bediscussing in a moment, I would submit that thiswould be an appropriate time to tighten the policyscrew another notch.Following his presentation Mr. Brill responded to questionson the consumer savings rate.Mr. Mitchell then noted that the first sentence of thestaff's draft directive read, "The economic and financial develop-ments reviewed at this meeting indicate that the domestic economy-40- 6/7/66 -41-is continuing to expand, with industrial prices rising further andcredit demands remaining strong." He asked whether, in view ofthe projection for a lower rate of growth in GNP in the secondquarter, it would not be more accurate to say, " ...although thedomestic economy is expanding at a less rapid rate than in thefirst quarter, industrial prices are rising further and creditdemands remain strong."Mr. Brill replied that he would be reluctant to see thedirective cast in terms of projections because they often werehighly uncertain. Moreover, it appeared likely that GNP growthwould return to the first-quarter pace in the third quarter. Inview of the apparent slowdown in the second quarter, however,the staff did suggest dropping the word "vigorously" in describingthe current pace of the expansion.In response to questions by Mr. Maisel, Mr. Brill saidthat the latest survey results on planned business capital out-lays implied less of an increase in real investment than theprevious survey because of the rise in machinery prices andconstruction costs. Capital spending was still expected to bea strong expansive force, however. The GNP price deflator wasprojected to rise substantially in the third quarter, from abouta 3 per cent annual rate of increase to 4.2 per cent. That wasmainly because of the expected Federal pay raise and the 6/7/66 -42-inauguration of the Medicare program, which together contributedsignificantly to the third-quarter figure.Mr. Maisel then asked whether growth in real GNP in thesecond quarter was less than the staff had projected early inthe year. Mr. Brill indicated that he was not certain, butwould undertake to determine the facts on the question. (Note:Following the meeting Mr. Brill informed Mr. Maisel that thestaff's estimate of second-quarter GNP in current dollar termshad proved accurate but growth in real GNP had been overestimated;there had been a larger than expected rise in the price deflator.)Mr. Axilrod made the following statement concerningfinancial developments:Since around mid-April interest rates onvirtually all securities and financing instrumentsoutside the Government securities market haveeither regained earlier highs or continued theiradvance to new highs for the year. Demand pressureshave been a driving force in some markets, butrestraints on supply appear to be more pervasivethan earlier, particularly in the mortgage market.Yields on U.S. Government securities haverecently lagged behind the rise in other marketrates. Apart from the impact of the 4-1/4 percent interest ceiling on Treasury bond yields,the relatively low level of U.S. Governmentsecurity rates can be mostly explained by theunusually large cash surplus the Federal Govern-ment is running in the second quarter--projectedto be about $9 billion, or $4 billion more than ayear ago--and the consequent relatively largereduction in debt outstanding--some inadvertent, asin the May refunding--which has been only partially 6/7/66replaced by new agency issues for cash. Part ofthis large surplus is the result of tax speed-ups and some is the result of a faster growth inGNP than was anticipated in the January budgetdocument. But while tax speed-ups and the morerapid GNP growth have taken some pressure offthe Government securities market, they havegenerated additional private credit demands inthe market and hence a widening of rate spreadsbetween private and U.S. Government securities.The general upward movement in the over-alllevel of rates has been accompanied by a reshapingof the yield curve. It now once again shows yieldsrelatively high at the short end and lower at thelong end. In the U.S. Government securitiesmarket, this is the result of the rise of yieldsin the 1 -3 year area to new high levels for theyear. That was the end of the market hit hardestby the recent rash of agency issues and it alsowas the area of the May refunding. And at thevery short end of credit markets, while the 3-month Treasury bill rate is relatively low,yields on commercial paper and bankers' acceptanceshave risen over 1 percentage point since theDecember discount rate increase and are morerepresentative of pressures in the short-termsector.Barring any change in the economic weatheror in the outlook for fiscal policy, I wouldsuspect that over the next few weeks there willbe a tendency for the yield curve to flattenout more as a result of an upward rate movementat the long end rather than a downward movementat the short- and intermediate-end. Such aconclusion is consistent with what we knowabout the corporate, municipal, and Federalagency calendar ahead and with the generallyrestrained availability of investment funds atsome major financial institutions.It is also consistent with the view thatthe relatively high cost of short-term funds tobanks may impel them, as it did in early winter(before the prime loan rate was raised), tomake portfolio adjustments or to tighten loanterms as strong loan demand continues. This,too, would add to upward pressures on long-termmarket rates, not to say on banks' own lending rates. 6/7/66The pressure for banks to undertake furtherportfolio adjustments and to restrain lendingwould become very intense if growth in aggregatereserves was considerably restrained. The leewaybanks have under Regulation Q ceilings to becomeaggressive in competing for short-term funds inthe CD market has been progressively reduced andthe competition of other short-term instrumentsis becoming more fierce. Banks have been offeringthe 5-1/2 per cent ceiling rate on shortermaturities (some reported in the 3 to 4 montharea) and secondary market trading in CD's istaking place above the ceiling rate in the 3 to6 month area. Thus, banks are close to becomingvery cramped in their ability to accommodateloan demand, especially if investors find itincreasingly preferable or necessary to utilizecompeting instruments such as Treasury billsfor liquidity purposes.By combining the picture described abovewith uncertainties facing nonbank savingsinstitutions after midyear interest crediting,with legislative uncertainties overhangingbanks, with the possibility that credit demandsin June and July will be very large partly fortemporary reasons, with the need for the agencymarket to digest a very large supply in a veryshort period, and with sizable bank CD maturities,one is driven to the conclusion that open marketpolicy should chart an unusually cautious coursein the period immediately ahead--recognizing thata considerable amount of restraint is alreadyin the financial system.It is possible, though, that net borrowedreserves could be deepened somewhat further--saycloser to $400 million--in the face of a tendencyfor reserve aggregates to grow rapidly withoutleading to a substantial risk of a short-runbind in the money markets. Any significantfurther tightening beyond that point threatensto bring up a whole host of problems very similarto those the Committee, and monetary policygenerally, faced last December. In principle,the problem is that the availability of bankreserves cannot be very much more constrained-44- 6/7/66without raising very difficult further issuesabout the sustainability of time deposit ceilingsand the discount rate--and all the complicatedquestions of timing that are involved in therelationship of such rates to open market policyand to other actions by the Administration andthe Congress.I think the problem of relationships betweenofficial and market rates is most dramatically seenin the Federal funds market, where the tradinglevel recently has often been 50 basis points ormore above the discount rate as large city bankshave used this market rather than the discountwindow to obtain additional reserve funds. Ifthe flow of nonborrowed reserves to the bankingsystem is reduced while loan demand stays large,it is very likely that the availability of Federalfunds will decline. The volume of Federal fundstransactions has shown signs of declining in Mayeven with the Federal funds rate rising to 5-1/4per cent at times. Intensification of such adevelopment would make it more necessary forlarge city banks to borrow at the discount window.Thus, a further tightening of monetary policywill be accompanied by stronger demands on thediscount window from all classes of member banksat the same time as market interest rate adjust-ments are occurring--and time deposits are becomingharder to buy. It seems clear, therefore, thatopen market policy's next significant step towardrestraint will mean that Regulation Q will produceanguish from banks, as they find their CD's squeezedinto shorter and shorter maturities, as well as fromnonbank savings institutions. And the discountrate and discount administration will become evenmore of a problem than they are now.Mr. Reynolds then presented the following statement on thebalance of payments:Last March, Mr. Hersey reported to this Com-mittee that Government technicians foresaw apayments deficit on the liquidity basis of as much as $2-1/2 billion this year--double last year'sdeficit--if aggregate demand were allowed toproduce a GNP of $735 billion. At the time, the$2-1/2 billion figure seemed startling. And suchan outcome still seemed avoidable, provided thatthe domestic boom were brought promptly undercontrol by an appropriate mixture of fiscal andmonetary restraints. But this was not done.And now we are having to become accustomed tothe $2-1/2 billion figure, and even to braceourselves for the possibility of a larger figure.The liquidity deficit in the first fourmonths of the year was already at a rate ofabout $2-1/2 billion. It would have exceededa $3 billion rate if the Treasury had not per-suaded some foreign central banks and inter-national institutions to shift from liquiddollar assets into over-one-year time depositsand into Federal agency securities--items thatare classified in the statistics as nonliquid.The alternative measure of the deficit,based on official reserve transactions, isnot a suitable one for identifying recenttrends, because special influence have causedit to swing widely from quarter to quarter.In the fourth quarter of last year, it was thelargest it had been in nearly three years. Notonly were private holders giving up dollars toshift back into sterling, but there were verylarge year-end shifts by foreign commercialbanks out of dollars into their own currencies,with consequent accretions to central bankholdings of claims on the United States. InJanuary-April of this year, the rate of deficitmeasured by official reserve transactions wasroughly $1-1/2 billion, but it would have beenhigher if there had not been reversals of theprevious year-end shifts.If the domestic boom should roar ahead inthe second half-year after the current slighthesitation passes, as projected in the greenbook,1/ it would be prudent to expect some further1/ The report, "Current Economic and Financial Conditions,"prepared for the Committee by the Board's staff.6/7/66-46- 6/7/66increase in the payments deficit, on either basisof calculation. The only source of improvementabout which one can now feel at all confident isa decline in new Canadian security issues, followingthe January-April bulge. Against that, and probablyoutweighing it, further deterioration seems likelyon at least five fronts.(1) Further shrinkage of the surplus onmerchandise trade is a strong possibility. Thetrade surplus was already down to an annual rateof less than $4 billion in January-April, comparedwith more than $5 billion in the fourth quarter of1965.(2) Direct investment outflows are thoughtto have fallen off to an annual rate of about $2-1/2billion in the first quarter; they will probably belarger than that during the rest of the year.(3) The available evidence points toward afurther expansion of U.S. military expendituresand economic aid outlays in Asia.(4) Even with Treasury encouragement, shiftsof foreign funds from liquid to nonliquid assetswill not continue at the April-May rate of some$200 million a month.(5) The reflow of U.S. bank credit may not besustained at the $1 billion annual rate that hasprevailed since last fall, at least not without afurther substantial tightening of domestic creditconditions. The recent sharp tightening of creditin several foreign countries, reported in the greenbook, makes a relative tightening in the UnitedStates more difficult to achieve.If all that were at stake was another one-yearsetback in our progress toward payments equilibrium--this time attributable mainly to a war that willsomeday end and a boom that is sure to fade--onemight hope to ride it out with equanimity. Onecould take comfort in the fact that some otherleading countries have also been experiencingaccelerated inflation. Also, reserves are nowaccruing more to the developing countries and lessto the traditional gold-buying countries (althoughsometimes developing countries also buy gold).Further U.S. recourse to the International MonetaryFund could limit our gold losses for a time, as ithas during the past year, permitting other countries-47- to exchange unwanted dollars for claims on theIMF instead of for gold.But, unfortunately, much more than a one-year setback is likely to be at stake. If, asseems possible, we are now seeing the beginningof a domestic price-wage spiral that could gathermomentum right into the next recession, ashappened in the late 1950's, and if some otherleading countries are about to be successful inslowing down their inflations, also as in thelate 1950's, then we may be risking a ten-yearsetback rather than a one-year setback. It isunlikely that we shall be allowed to repeat thegradual, one-decade approach to payments adjust-ment. We would be starting this time from amuch weaker reserve position than in 1957, andagainst a long background of doubt and disappoint-ment.It seems to me that the risk of a lastingsetback on the payments front is very much moreserious than the opposite risk of stepping alittle too hard on the brake.Chairman Martin reported briefly on the recent meeting ofthe American Bankers Association in Madrid, which he had attendedalong with Messrs. Bopp, Daane, and Hayes. The meeting was theABA's thirteenth Monetary Conference. About 125 people hadattended, including about 30--a larger than usual number--fromforeign countries.There was an underlying note of concern at the meeting ofa kind that he had not seen for some time, the Chairman remarked.The concern was hinged on the belief that the balance of paymentsproblem of the U.S. was out of hand. A number of foreigners hadcommented during the course of the meeting about the necessity for6/7/66-48- 6/7/66 -49-increasing the gold holdings of their countries and reducing theirdollar holdings. While it would not be right to say there was anyreal distrust of the dollar in Europe as yet, the seeds of suchdistrust were there. And the latest sterling developments mightwell have been forecast from the discussions at the meeting.One competent commentator had remarked, Chairman Martinsaid, that America's present problem in Vietnam was analogousto France's problem in Algeria; despite French claims that theAlgerian hostilities were not a real war, they eventually led tothe devaluation of the franc. The Chairman did not think theanalogy was necessarily an accurate one, but it pointed up Europeanapprehensions about the U.S. situation. Those apprehensionsshould be borne in mind because they could lead to seriousconsequences unless some means was found for dealing withinflationary pressures in the U.S. It was possible that thecrest of the domestic boom had been passed, although he personallywas not ready to pass a judgment on that question. But theinteresting point was that virtually all of the Europeans whohad been through a similar experience were convinced that whateverpause was occurring in the economy now was just a prelude toanother strong upswing. Also to be borne in mind was thepossibility of real financial pressures developing over the nextseveral months. 6/7/66 -50-In response to an inquiry by Chairman Martin, Mr. Daanesaid he had nothing to add regarding the Madrid meeting. Hethought the Chairman's report reflected accurately the feeling ofpessimism in Europe regarding U.S. efforts to resolve its balanceof payments problem.The Chairman then invited Mr. Daane to comment on theRome meeting of the Deputies of the Group of Ten that had beenheld prior to the ABA meeting in Madrid.Mr. Daane noted that the Deputies had met in Rome onMay 17, 18, and 19. The meeting was held against the backgroundof a rather sharp exchange of views, which had been reported inthe press, between Chairman Emminger of the Deputies and Mr. Schweitzerof the International Monetary Fund. Mr. Schweitzer had chargedpublicly that the Group of Ten was dragging its feet on the wholequestion of international monetary reform. Also, he had scathinglycompared the proposal for a set-aside, for the use of countriesoutside the Group, of any new reserve assets created to theoutmoded "separate but equal" accommodations treatment of minoritygroups in the U.S. In his reply Chairman Emminger had emphasizedthat, because the Deputies were engaged on a long-run task, thedifference of a few months one way or the other in completingtheir preparatory work was not of great importance. With respectto the "separate but equal" charge, he observed that the ten countries 6/7/66 -51-of the Group would always have to bear the main responsibilityand financial burden involved in the functioning of the system.Mr. Daane noted that Chairman Emminger had prepared adraft report, organized into five chapters, for the considerationof the Deputies. The introductory chapter referred to the needfor a better balance of payments adjustment mechanism, theinstability in the present system related to shifts in compositionof reserve assets, and the probable inadequacy of gold for futurereserve needs. The flavor of the introduction was that there wasno general shortage of international liquidity now but that itwas the consensus of the Group that there was likely to be aproblem in the future. The introduction also referred to therole played and the contribution made by short-term creditfacilities, and to their potential for further development.The second chapter dealt with possible improvements inthe international payments system, Mr. Daane said. It includedconsiderable discussion of the need for strengthening the processof multilateral surveillance to bring about better adjustments,perhaps even going as far as suggesting review and coordinationof national reserve policies. Chapter 3 dealt with the elementsof various proposals for the creation of reserve assets. Therewas little discussion of the first three chapters at the Romemeeting. 6/7/66Chapter 4, Mr. Daane continued, involved an attempt toget away from a simple cataloguing of views on individual elementsof various proposals and to put forward the most desirable "packageplan" or plans. Most of the attention at the meeting was centeredon a draft of chapter 4 prepared by the British delegation in aneffort to get the Group to coalesce around a proposal for areserve unit for the limited group, setting aside for futurediscussion appropriate provision for other members of the IMF.While the British proposal would retain the principle that anexpansible inner group would have responsibility for insuringthe acceptability of the new reserve units, it would permitunits to be issued to nonparticipating countries. On the unresolvedissue of acceptability the proposal provided for a compromiseinvolving upper and lower holding limits. If a country accumulatednew units above an upper holding limit it could convert them,100 per cent, into gold. Transfer of units below the lower limitwould be at a ratio to either gold or dollars. Thus, the proposalcontained some of the acceptability elements of both the U.S.proposal and that of Chairman Emminger.The Group did not coalesce around the British proposal,Mr. Daane remarked. The French took their usual position thatthere was no need to do anything at present, particularly in viewof the continuing U.S. balance of payments deficit. The U.S.-52- 6/7/66 -53-delegates demurred on the grounds that they still preferred theirown "dual" proposal, which included provisions for drawing rightsas well as new reserve units. The conclusion was that chapter 4would still leave open the options of going toward drawing rights,new units, or some combination of the two. The European viewnow involves new units for the limited group and possibledrawing rights for others, while the U.S. proposal involvesdrawing rights for everyone. The issue of universality wasdefinitely in the minds of the Deputies as well as of the peopleat the IMF.There was some discussion also of the form and content ofchapter 5 on Conclusions and Recommendations, Mr. Daane observed.An understanding was reached that a new draft of this Conclusionschapter would be prepared by Chairman Emminger on the basis ofsuggestions sent in to him before the next meeting of the Group,scheduled for Frankiurt, Germany, June 21-24, 1966.The other question discussed, Mr. Daane reported, was howand when to move ahead into the second stage. His personal viewwas that the U.S. balance of payments picture might well affectthe willingness of the Europeans to take that step. The U.S.had proposed moving into a second stage involving an AdvisoryCommittee of Ministers and Governors in the Fund, with about 38Ministers and Governors to cover the whole Fund membership. He 6/7/66 -54-understood that in Fund Board discussions subsequent to theGroup of Ten meeting the IMF Executive Directors had resistedthat idea.He might note one other point, Mr. Daane said, that mighthave partly reflected the effects of the current U.S. balance ofpayments position. When the Deputies turned to chapter 3, dealingwith elements of reserve asset creation, the discussion broughtout clearly the considerable interest on the part of the continentalEuropeans in establishing preconditions, both procedural andsubstantive, that would prevent early or excessive activation ofmachinery set up to create reserves. In that respect they weremoving in the direction of the French position. Among the sug-gestions made for preconditions for activation were a rule ofunanimity, an initial date not earlier than 1970, or a two-yearperiod in which there were no net additions to world gold stocks.In addition, the Europeans talked about setting up some qualitativecriteria that would very rigidly limit the amount of reservescreated. The restrictive flavor of the discussion of activationwas similar to that evident in the questioning of the desirabilityof moving into the second stage and in the repeated emphasis onthe need for tighter multilateral surveillance.Chairman Martin then called for the go-around of commentsand views on economic conditions and monetary policy, beginning withMr. Treiber, who made the following statement: 6/7/66Business activity continues strong. Thedemand for autos is less intense than earlier, butit is too soon to say whether this is more than atemporary dip. More striking are the indicationsthat capital spending plans continue to be verystrong--despite moral suasion, tighter credit,shortages of labor, and slower deliveries. Arapidly growing aggregate demand for goods and servicescontinues to press on the limitations imposed by moreslowly growing capacity.The most recent survey of consumers' buyingintentions shows no significant change; whileconsumers have reduced their automobile buyingplans from the very high level of the previoussurvey, their buying plans still are at the highlevel of a year ago. On the price front, nonfoodprices--at both wholesale and retail--moved sharplyhigher in April. The highly tentative May figuresindicate that industrial wholesale prices have heldabout constant. There has perhaps been some reductionin inflationary psychology, but the inflationarypressure of demand on resources continues to bepresent.The balance of payments outlook is unsatis-factory, and the prospects are gloomy. The annualrate of the deficit for the first quarter of 1966was much greater than the deficit for the year 1965.The trade balance has deteriorated and could deterioratea good deal more unless inflationary forces at homeare checked. There appears to be little prospect ofany significant reduction in direct investment outflows,and the tourist gap is likely to widen. The Vietnamconflict promises to be a continuing drain. It seemsprobable that there will be a substantial increase inthe balance of payments deficit for 1966 as comparedwith 1965. Success in the Treasury's effort to inducea further shift of foreign official and internationalfunds out of liquid dollar instruments into nonliquidassets will serve merely to improve the balance ofpayments statistics. The worsening of our balanceof payments could undermine foreign confidence inthe ability and determination of the United Statesto rectify its balance of payments problem; andattempts at window-dressing are not likely to helpthe situation.-55- 6/7/66Bank credit growth slowed in May. The riseso far this year is still very substantial, thoughless so than in 1965. In April the loss of fundsat thrift institutions was large. The mortgagemarket is very tight. But so far the effects onresidential construction activity have not beengreat. Bank liquidity has dropped further as bankshave continued to liquidate U.S. Government secu-rities. The demand for business loans continuesstrong. There is concern about financial strainsthat may occur at the June tax payment date and atthe end of the first half of the year when thriftinstitutions will be crediting interest on savingsaccounts.The present situation calls for coordinatedrestraint by fiscal policy and monetary policy.Monetary policy has been working. The big policyissue, it seems to me, continues to be fiscalpolicy. The Federal Government is still providinga considerable fiscal stimulus in a setting markedby excess demand. It seems to me that the promptannouncement and enactment of a program for asimple increase in Federal individual and corporateincome taxes would help to reduce the inflationarypressures and to promote the maintenance of anorderly and balanced economy now, thus contributingover the long run to sustainable economic growthand the expansion of employment. More fiscalrestraint would, of course, lessen the need toplace too great an anti-inflationary burden onmonetary policy, and would reduce the inevitablepressure on interest rates.Continuing monetary restraint is called for.With interest rates on time deposits pressingcloser to Regulation Q ceilings, with the recentadvance in several money market interest rates,and with a generally taut tone in the money market,there is not much room for increasing the pressureon bank reserve positions without endangering thecurrent viability of the discount rate and Regu-lation Q ceilings. It seems to me that it wouldbe desirable to maintain as much restraint as isfeasible without creating strong expectations ofa change in the discount rate. Such a coursewould involve continued firm conditions in the-56- 6/7/66money market and continued pressure on bank reservepositions, with net borrowed reserves perhaps in the$350-$400 million range.Alternative A of the draft directives preparedby the staff with the proviso clause would seem tofit the prescription I have in mind. The provisoclause constitutes a fitting reminder in the directiveof the basic thrust of policy. Under the proviso, weshould move toward lesser reserve availability Landfirmer money market conditions if bank credit expandsmore rapidly than expected. Yet the Manager shouldnot be expected to react automatically to purelystatistical short-range changes in required reserves.With the stresses of the tax date and the approachinginterest payment date for thrift institutions, afurther increase in restraint under the proviso clauseshould be approached with caution.I will now comment on member bank borrowing inthe Second Federal Reserve District.1/As regards borrowing by country banks, the System'sprogram of monetary restraint is now finally reachingdown into the country banks, and beginning to bite.The country banks, like the reserve city banks, arefaced with a continuing heavy demand for loans, whichthe have met and are continuing to meet throughwhatever means are available. Traditionally, countrybanks have maintained an excess of reserves overLorroings or a net free reserve position. Since themiddle of March, however, country banks have beenshowing a net borrowed reserve position. Since largecorrespondent banks are no longer in a position to meetthe needs of the country banks, the country banks arerelying more and more on the discount window to avoid1/ In transmitting the agenda for this meeting theSecretary of the Committee had indicated that "interest has beenexpressed in hearing any comments the Presidents might care tomake concerning the factors underlying the recent substantialincrease in country bank borrowing at the Federal Reserve Banks,and whether any banks borrowing at the discount window wereal-o selling Federal funds to others during the same period."-5-- 6/7/66liquidating securities, in the face of continuing highloan demand. As our discount window policy begins tobe applied to these borrowings, a restrictive effectupon expansion of credit by country member banks shouldfollow.As regards banks borrowing at the discount windowand selling Federal funds to others, we have taken theposition that the large correspondent banks who areacting as dealers in Federal funds should not borrowfrom the discount window during any reserve periodin which they are net sellers of Federal funds.Recognizing the fact that in order to maintain amarket in Federal funds these banks must be sellersof Federal funds as well as purchasers, we have notconsidered borrowing inappropriate as long as thebank was a net purchaser of Federal funds. On onlythree occasions (one country bank and two city banks)were banks borrowers at the discount window and netsellers of Federal funds in the same reserve period.We satisfied ourselves in each instance by directcontact that the situation was inadvertent and notfor the purpose of obtaining a rate differential. Innone of the three cases has the practice been repeated.We have seen no instance of a net sale of Federalfunds by a bank which has borrowed from us with theobjective of gaining the benefit of a rate differential.There is still another matter in which I thinkthe Committee would be interested. It concerns theproblem of possible withdrawals from savings banksat midyear.Yesterday the President of the Savings Banks TrustCompany, which serves as a kind of central bank forthe mutual savings banks of New York State, and thePresidents of three of the large New York City savingsbanks called at the Federal Reserve Bank of New Yorkto discuss a possible savings bank crisis in July.At the end of the first quarter of 1966 the savingsbanks of New York State experienced rather largewithdrawals; they fear even larger withdrawals atmidyear. The savings banks are comparatively illiquid,with limited access to commercial bank credit and thecapital markets. Emergency sales of their holdingsof U.S. Government securities and agency securitieswould not only bring them substantial losses butcould disrupt the U.S. Government securities market.-58- 6/7/66While they do not predict a crisis, they thinkthat a crisis is possible unless there are alternativemeans for prompt relief, possibly through the FederalReserve System, in the event of the withdrawal fromthe savings banks of several hundred million dollarsin a couple of days. A crisis for the savings bankswould, of course, have adverse repercussions on theentire banking and financial system.There was a discussion of the possibility ofsetting up a mechanism whereby the Federal ReserveSystem could provide relief, if needed, to avoid acrisis. For example, to the extent that the largersavings banks in New York City have available forpledge direct obligations of the United States, suchbanks might, after exhausting their normal borrowingfacilities, borrow from the Federal Reserve Bank ofNew York on the security of those obligations, pursuantto the thirteenth paragraph of Section 13 of theFederal Reserve Act. If additional borrowings fromthe Federal Reserve Bank become necessary on the partof those banks or any other New York State savingsbanks whose needs cannot be satisfied by the SavingsBanks Trust Company, an arrangement might be madewhereby a member bank in New York City could act asa medium or agent for the Savings Banks Trust Companyin borrowing from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York,it being contemplated that the collateral would notqualify for use in connection with advances underSection 13, but rather under Section 10(b), of theFederal Reserve Act. Permission of the Board ofGovernors would, of course, be necessary for such aborrowing under the ninth paragraph of Section 19of the Federal Reserve Act and Section 201.5 ofRegulation A.The savings bank representatives agreed tofurnish us promptly with a memorandum outlining theproblem and possible solutions, to the end thatanother meeting be held and further discussions hadwithin the next ten days. Stress was placed on thedesirability of setting up the machinery for handlingthe problem as far in advance as possible, and alsoof having the operating rules clearly understood byall, as soon as the way is open. We indicated agenerally sympathetic attitude toward the savings-59- 6/7/66 -60-banks' problem, and will be working closely with themand the Superintendent of Banks of New York. As soonas we receive the memorandum we will be discussingthe subject further with the Board of Governors.Last week we met with the President of theFederal Home Loan Bank of New York. He was notalarmed about the savings and loan situation in hisdistrict. The Federal Home Loan Bank of New York isprepared to provide financial assistance to associa-tions to help them meet any unusual withdrawals thatmay arise at midyear. From the supervisor'sviewpoint he saw much to be gained in the currentexperience; higher standards of lending and operationsare being promoted.Mr. Ellis reported that the basic posture of the FirstDistrict economy continued to be one of firm pressure againstavailable resources. With factory output rising, with capitalexpenditures rising, with construction activity rising andjobs seeking workers, more attention was being directed towardthe financial reflection of such pressures and their immediateoutlook.In construction, Mr. Ellis said, new contracts duringthe first four months of this year were 43 per cent aboveyear-ago levels. Nonresidential building contracts in Aprilregistered a 45 per cent year-to-year gain. Residentialcontracts posted a 47 per cent gain, mostly due to a sharprise in apartment buildings. In partial reflection of thosetrends, real estate loans of the District's weekly reportingmember banks stood 12 per cent higher than a year ago, and inlate May were increasing at a 10 per cent annual rate. It 6/7/66 -61-seemed fair to conclude that financing had been available inNew England.There was some evidence, Mr. Ellis continued, that thefirst quarter brought a rush of loan commitments that wouldrequire a period of digestion. At least one insurance companyreported that during the first quarter it committed all thefunds it expected to have available during 1966. A period ofreduced loan commitments also faced the mutual savings banks--considered as a group. While some individual banks still hadfunds to invest out of State at net yields of 6 per cent orbetter, others found their slight dip in deposits during Aprilbrought their loan-deposit ratios up to or even above the85 per cent legal loan limit in Massachusetts. If presentlyscheduled deposit withdrawal notifications for July materializedin historical patterns, several more of the mutuals would bepushed above their loan ceilings, and would be under the samekind of pressure as Mr. Treiber had indicated was possible inNew York. The mutuals had been "refreshing" their loancommitments for member banks.Mr. Ellis went on to say that the Boston Reserve Bank'sMay 11 survey of time deposits at New England member banksprovided evidence of continued efforts to attract time andsavings deposits. One-quarter of the member banks now issued 6/7/66 -62-non-negotiable CD's, and their outstanding volume had increased15 per cent since December. A full third issued negotiableCD's in denominations of less than $100,000 and had lifted theoutstanding level by 25 per cent since December.Along with their 23 per cent year-to-year gain intotal savings deposits (and 2 per cent gain in demand deposits),weekly reporting member banks in New England had foundincreasing difficulty in meeting their reserve requirements. Inthe three statement weeks ending last Wednesday (June 1), thebanks were borrowing on average four times more than a yearago. The green book indicated that "the factors occasioningthe recent sharp increase in borrowing by country banks ...are not completely clear." In the First District's case, thenumber of country banks borrowing had doubled in the pastthree weeks. As the large correspondent banks drew near theacceptable limits of their borrowing at the Federal ReserveBank they had curtailed their willingness to provide Federalfunds on call of their small correspondent banks, who in turnshowed up at the discount window.The Boston Bank had reviewed the borrowing and Federalfunds activities of those banks making daily reports to it,Mr. Ellis said. Having regard to the fact that the fundssales and Reserve Bank borrowings occurred at different times 6/7/66 -63-in a reserve period, no convincing evidence was found of banksmaking a deliberate policy of borrowing at the discount window tosell Federal funds. Borrowing seemed directly related to thebasic factors of peak seasonal deposit and loan pressures super-imposed on cyclical conditions of strong loan demand andtightening monetary policy.About the same words came to his mind, Mr. Ellis said, inappraising the national scene. Concern seemed greatest in thefinancial reflections of a surging economy. Capital investmentwas surging ahead in spite of the Presidential plea. Vietnamimpacts were showing up ever more broadly as the effects of defensespending were imposed on top of business and consumer demands.However slight its real effect on release of the pressures onresources, he was inclined to regard the cutback in auto productionas a welcome relief from a prevalence of excesses.Starting with the premise that the strong upward thrust ofthe economy was continuing, as he did, Mr. Ellis continued, itremained a critical but still unresolved issue as to whether atax increase might be forthcoming. Facing that uncertainty, themajor alternatives of monetary policy lay in holding the presentdegree of tightness or continuing to move gradually in firmingfurther. While reluctant to lose momentum, he was persuaded thatit was time for a pause in the tightening process. Three factors 6/7/66 -64-predominated in his conclusion: first, the projected tightness inmoney markets in June and early July as corporations had to meetaccelerated tax payments out of reduced liquidity; second, theexposed position of savings institutions having deposit losses andJuly dividend payments while the Government enlarged its enticementsfor savers' funds by issue of attractively priced participations;and third, recent moves in policy that added another degree oftightness in a market increasingly affected by cumulative effectsof past tightening.Those factors persuaded him, Mr. Ellis said, to urge a pausein which further tightening would be foregone to allow the marketsto work their way through present difficulties and to allow theCommittee another assessment of what it could accomplish byfurther moves. Those views led him to select alternative A ofthe second paragraph of the draft directive, with the provisoclause included in order to forestall loss of ground. As to thefirst paragraph, he would prefer to substitute the word "the" for"our" in the references to the U.S. foreign trade surplus and thedeficit in international payments.Mr. Irons reported that conditions in the Eleventh Districtcontinued strong. There was, perhaps, some slight moderation asa result of developments in housing and automobiles, as was thecase nationally. On the other hand, employment, production, and 6/7/66 -65-distribution (as reflected by department store sales) had continuedto show steady increases, with indications of further moderateincreases in the months ahead. Employment had been rising at a rateof about one per cent a month. The advance was rather general andthe total had reached a new record. Production in the Districtwas up about 0.8 per cent in the past month, with increasesoutnumbering declines in about a two-to-one ratio. Constructioncontracts were down; cumulatively, for the year to date, they wereabout 6 per cent below the same period a year ago. Departmentstore sales were running seven to eight per cent over a year agoand were continuing to show strength. For the first time in along while, however, there had been a slight decline in new carregistrations. The agricultural situation was quite favorable.Moisture conditions were generally good, although there were somespotty areas, and the livestock conditions were good. Cash farmreceipts in the first quarter were 22 per cent above a year ago,with livestock accounting for about 30 per cent of the rise andcrops the remainder.In the financial area, Mr. Irons continued, bankerscontinued to talk about the lack of liquidity and the strengthof loan demand, although loans in total and in most individualcategories declined in the period and were running below the sameperiod a year ago. Investments showed a slight decrease as 6/7/66 -66-holdings of Governments were reduced and other securities wereacquired at a low rate. As in the preceding period both time anddemand deposits declined, but negotiable CD's advanced to arecord level for the District. Federal funds purchases weredown a bit but still exceeded sales.Both the number of member banks borrowing at the discountwindow and the amount of borrowings had shown increases, Mr. Ironssaid. In reviewing recent discount window activity he had foundthat two reserve city banks borrowing from the Reserve Bank soldFederal funds in the same period. That was not a regularpractice, however; the banks in question happened to be caughtwith surplus funds at the end of the period. He believed that someof the District's small country banks, although not a great manyas yet, probably were coming to the discount window because theircity correspondents were suggesting that conditions were tighter.Three or four of the banks that had come to the window in thelast few weeks had not borrowed from the Reserve Bank for severalyears, and he suspected that they were giving their correspondentsa breathing spell. Still, the number of banks borrowing and thetotal volume of borrowings in the District were not large; in theweek ending June 1, 17 country banks and one reserve city bank wereat the window for a total of $18 million. In trying to trace the reasons for country bank borrowings,Mr. Irons continued, he found that seasonal agricultural demandswere a contributing factor, and were likely to continue to be so.There was no evidence that the small banks were dealing in Federalfunds one way or the other. He did not find the increase indiscounting activity to pose a particularly difficult problem,and in some respects it was desirable for a few more banks thathad not borrowed in some time to come to the window. The presentlevel of discounting reflected a combination of seasonal, cyclical,and money market considerations, and he saw no evidence of effortsto arbitrage interest rate differentials.Mr. Irons commented that the national economic situationhad already been discussed fully, and all members were aware ofthe balance of payments problem. With respect to policy, his posi-tion was quite close to that taken by Mr. Ellis. The next threeor four weeks would be a period of rather intense uncertaintiesand severe pressures in the money market. The Committee hadmade reserves less readily available and had contributed to therise in market interest rates. It was not possible to say whatlay ahead, but the Committee had achieved a considerable bitewith its recent policy actions. At this time, he thought, cautionwould be prudent. He would like to see net reserve availability6/7/66-67- 6/7/66 -68-not deepened further but held at about its recent level. He didnot believe that the Committee could strain the existing positionmuch further without giving rise to pressures for action withrespect to the discount rate and Regulation Q ceilings. Heagreed that coordination of fiscal and monetary policies would bedesirable to relieve financial pressures, but he saw no indicationsthat fiscal policy action would be taken.Mr. Irons favored alternative A of the draft directiveswhich, he noted, called for maintaining net reserve availabilityand related money market conditions in about their recent ranges.He would interpret that language to call for net borrowed reservesof around $350 million. While he did not feel strongly on thematter, he would prefer to omit the parenthetical clause in thestaff's draft.Mr. Daane left the meeting during the course of Mr. Irons'remarks.Mr. Swan reported that in April the unemployment rate inthe Twelfth District had declined again, to 4.3 from 4.5 per cent,to a considerable extent as a result of another substantial increasein aerospace employment. Retail sales continued to do less wellthan in the rest of the country and, of course, residentialconstruction was weak. Lumber prices declined in mid-May followinga further decline in orders; Government purchases were off and it 6/7/66 -69-had become evident that new labor contracts would be negotiatedwithout strikes. District agriculture seemed to be in goodshape, although the annual question of the availability of laborfor the summer and fall was again being raised. The firstauthorization for Mexican labor, issued in May, called for 1,000workers to be brought in for the strawberry harvest. In thatconnection, it was interesting to note that strawberry plantingswere up sharply in Mexico this year. During the first quarter of1966 imports of fresh strawberries from Mexico were double thoseof a year ago and frozen strawberry imports were up aboutone-third.Mr. Swan said he would not take the time to review recentdevelopments with respect to the mortgage market and nonbanksavings institutions in the District because they had been coveredin his Bank's report on the recent special survey.1/ He would addonly that the figures the Reserve Bank had obtained for the firstten days of May indicated a further loss in the share accountsof California State-chartered savings and loan associations, whichaccounted for about 70 per cent of total share accounts in the1/ A report entitled "Current Mortgage Market Conditions asI quoted in Special Surveys by the Federal Reserve Banks" hadbeen distributed to the Committee prior to this meeting in theform of a special supplemental appendix to the report, "CurrentEconomic and Financial Conditions." 6/7/66 -70-State. The decrease amounted to $28 million, much less than theloss in the corresponding period in April. While the decline wasfar from welcome and there still was a good deal of concern aboutwhat might happen in early July, there was some feeling of reliefthat it was not larger.Mr. Swan went on to say that the Home Loan Bank Board'srecent ruling raised to 5 per cent the rate that California savingsand loan associations could pay on share accounts without havingtheir borrowing privileges at the Bank restricted. That rulingwas followed by widespread announcements by the associations notalready paying 5 per cent that they would begin doing so onJuly 1. The associations that had gone to 5 per cent in April cameout much better in terms of changes in their share accounts thanothers, although it was not clear whether their experiencereflected the higher rate or their greater strength. There naturallywas some hope on the part of other associations that 5 per centwould prove to be a viable rate.Savings deposits at weekly reporting member banks continuedto decline in May, Mr. Swan said, although the decrease in that casealso was much less than in April. Other time deposits of individuals,partnerships, and corporations rose substantially more than savingsaccounts declined. The net growth in total time and savingsdeposits in May was somewhat greater than in April, although both 6/7/66 -71-gross amounts were considerably smaller. The District's largerbanks finally appeared as net interbank purchasers of Federal fundsfor two weeks in May, although the amounts involved were not large.In the other weeks of the month they were net sellers, as they hadbeen previously, but in relatively small amounts.In checking on the questions that had been raised regardingborrowing banks, Mr. Swan continued, he had not learned of any suchbanks in the District that also were net sellers of Federal fundsin the same period. Some borrowers had operated on both sidesof the funds market, but that was not a concern as long as theywere not net sellers. Borrowings by country banks were somewhathigher in May than in April, and they also were higher in the twoweeks ending June 1 than in the first half of May; but the totalstill was not large. The week ending June 1 saw a larger numberof country banks borrowing than any other recent week, but thatnumber was only five, and those country banks accounted for only20 per cent of total borrowings from the Reserve Bank in the week.It was difficult to find any common thread in their reasons forborrowing. In the past month there had been two cases resultingfrom agricultural developments, such as delays in harvesting, andone or two cases reflecting unexpected losses of public deposits.Two of the five country banks were large institutions whosepositions were not markedly different from those of the largereserve city banks. 6/7/66Turning to monetary policy, Mr. Swan said that nationaldevelopments since the last meeting of the Committee seemed tobe about in line with what had been anticipated. He gatheredfrom Mr. Holmes' remarks that despite problems of measurementoperations had worked out rather well under a directive thatreferred to aggregate reserves as well as to net reserve availa-bility. He found it was not easy to reach a conclusion regardingpolicy for the period ahead. The balance of payments situationwas serious; indeed, if that were the only consideration beforethe Committee it probably would call not for gradual tighteningbut rather for overt action that would affect attitudes abroad.However, in light of the domestic situation--the uncertaintiesin credit markets, the seasonal needs, the problems facing savingsinstitutions, and so forth--he came out about about whereMr. Irons had, with the feeling that the Committee should avoidany further tightening, at least until its next meeting. Hewould accept alternative A of the draft directives and woulddefinitely include the parenthetical phrase. He thought theCommittee should continue to recognize the aggregate reservequestion even though there was some problem of measurement, andthat it should refer to the seasonally expected change despitethe problem of definition. He agreed with Mr. Treiber on the needfor caution in applying more restraint under the proviso clause,-72- 6/7/66 -73-and he would favor a rather liberal interpretation of seasonalchanges. It was necessary, he thought, to meet the additionaldemands that were expected in the next few weeks.Mr. Galusha said that except for developments in the NinthDistrict mortgage market, on which a report had been distributed,there were no District developments of such interest as to requirebeing reported at this time.As to country bank borrowing, Mr. Galusha said thereappeared to be nothing unusual going on in the District. The volumeof such borrowing was considerably higher in May of this year thanin May of last year, and quite a bit higher than in April. Butthe increase from April to May was just about what the establishedseasonal pattern would have led one to expect. If anything, NinthDistrict country bank borrowing was surprisingly low in May, forthe loss in total deposits was much greater than seasonal. Norhad any evidence been found that during May District country banks,whether in debt to the Reserve Bank or not, entered the fundsmarket on the selling side. The country banks had not yet becomegenerally active in the funds market.Mr. Galusha mentioned that the Reserve Bank's recent effortto dissuade a few of the city banks from using the discount windowas much as they had been was crowned with considerable success.Those banks which were, by the Reserve Bank's standards, being abit too free with discount credit had stopped being so. 6/7/66Turning to open market policy, Mr. Galusha said it appearedto him that the Committee could do no better for the present thanto aim at maintaining the status quo in money and credit markets.In his judgment, the objective from now until the next meetingshould be to hold short-term rates about where they had been lately,on average, and not pay too much attention to the level of the billrate, to net borrowed reserves, or, for that matter, to aggregatereserves or bank credit. Fortunately, a holding action againstpronounced changes in the complex of short-term rates should notinvolve sharp deviations from recent average values for the billrate or the level of net borrowed reserves. Medium- and long-termrates could well move somewhat higher, but that would not seem tobe an implication from which the Committee ought to shrink.Mr. Galusha noted the concern about the upcoming tax dateand, more important, the implications of generally and markedlyhigher interest rates for nonbank intermediaries and the residentialconstruction industry. In his opinion, the need for furthermonetary restraint, as measured by purely economic criteria, hadnot lessened. GNP, as valued in current prices, would undoubtedlyincrease a good deal less this quarter than it had in the last two,but at the moment the expectation must be for a return, whetherin the next quarter or in the fourth quarter, to unsustainablylarge increases. Even if the likelihood of a rebound in auto sales-74- 6/7/66 -75-were to decrease and the likelihood of the worst fears aboutresidential construction being realized were to increase, therewould still be the twin problems of a clearly unsustainablepattern of investment demand and sectoral inflation. He observed,in that connection, that the upcoming Governmental sale offinancial assets could hardly be thought of as making the Committee'stask easier.For unsustainably high investment demand, greater monetaryrestraint was an obvious solution, Mr. Galusha continued. Itcould not be an inviting one, however, nor even a realistic one,until ways of lessening the effects on nonbank intermediaries andthe residential construction industry were found. The System couldtherefore do worse than to lead the search for such ways. He didnot know what answers there might be, but there was a legitimacyand urgency in the questioning.Mr. Galusha favored alternative A of the draft directives.But in opting for that alternative, he was assuming that theemphasis over the period until the Committee's next meeting wouldbe on money market conditions. He objected to the proviso becauseit presented, it seemed to him, an unreasonable restraint on theDesk because so many things could happen that would have effectson required reserves. 6/7/66 -76-Mr. Scanlon reported that with the exception of passengercars, output of all major Seventh District industries eitherincreased further in May or held at the high levels of earliermonths. While fears of accelerating inflation appeared to havebeen dampened somewhat in recent weeks, no significant apprehensionwas detected among observers in the Seventh District concerning apossible early end to the current boom. Automobile people wereprojecting auto assemblies for the calendar year 1966 at 8.7million, 7 per cent less than in 1965 but substantially more thanin any previous year. They pointed out that the figure was closeto projections made last fall shortly after the 1966 models wereintroduced. Truck production was still pressed to capacity, andJune output was expected to reach a new high of 175,000 units.Promised delivery times on most types of flat-rolled steelproducts had been reduced sharply, Mr. Scanlon noted, mainlybecause of curtailed requirements of auto firms. As yet, therewas no indication of reduced shipments of steel to other users.For the year as a whole, local steel experts estimated total ingottonnage at a record 134 million tons, with output in the fourquarters as follows: 33, 35, 32, and 35 million tons. Additionalfinishing capacity should ease supply schedules further by year-end,assuming that sufficient workers were available. 6/7/66 -77-Labor markets in the Seventh District evidently tightenedfurther in the second quarter, and it was apparent that heavydemands for labor were strengthening the hands of unions innegotiations with management. It was said that fear of a wagefreeze was often given as one reason for the higher labor demands.In the construction trades, recent three-year contracts calledfor 30 to 40 cents per hour additional each year in wages andfringe benefits, and some contracts were for even longer terms,with annual wage increments.The Chicago Reserve Bank's recent survey, Mr. Scanlon said,indicated sharp cutbacks in most areas in new commitments formortgages on both residential and nonresidential properties, aswas the case in other Districts. However, demand for constructionin the Seventh District was very strong. While housing permits wereoff sharply in April in the north central region, that was caused,in part at least, by strikes and unusually heavy rainfall. Theavailability of labor and of materials such as copper and brassconduits and fittings, plywood, and some aluminum products, as wellis the availability and cost of funds, would largely determine theLevel of construction activity in the Seventh District this summer.Several of the major savings and loan associations in the Chicagoarea had boosted loan rates, effective this week, with the"standard" single family mortgage now limited to 20 years, with a25 per cent downpayment and a contract interest rate of 6-1/4 per cent. 6/7/66 -78-In that connection, Mr. Scanlon commented that whilesavings and loan associations in the Chicago area had generallyindicated sharp cutbacks in forward commitments for mortgage funds,the reason for the cutbacks was not illiquidity in all cases.For example, the head of one of the largest associations in themiddle west said that while his association had funds to lend toqualified borrowers it had cut back forward commitments more than25 per cent because, with all the talk and press comment aboutwhat was going to happen July 1, he wanted to build up substantialliquidity so he could operate on his own resources under the mostsevere conditions foreseeable at this time. The savings and loanexecutive mentioned particularly that he could not be certain whathelp would be forthcoming from the Federal Home Loan Bank, so hewanted to play it safe.Turning to weekly reporting banks, Mr. Scanlon reportedthat loans to manufacturing firms had been rising strongly whilenew loans to trade establishments and finance companies had notkept pace with repayments. He found no evidence to date ofsignificant slowing in either real estate or consumer loans. Theweekly reporting banks continued to liquidate Governments duringmost of May, though at a moderate pace, but they acquired arelatively large amount of other securities, probably agencies. 6/7/66-79-Through mid-May, Mr. Scanlon continued, the smaller banksin the District continued to show more rapid loan growth andfaster liquidation of Governments than the weekly reporters.Borrowing at the discount window in recent weeks had been largelyby country banks, and the number of such banks seeking accommoda-tion had risen to a new high. It was understood that some countrymember banks were being encouraged by their city correspondentsto use the discount window in preference to their correspondent.The Reserve Bank knew of one correspondent bank that loaned tononmembers at the discount rate but charged the prime rate to memberbanks. It was not aware of any unusual amount of downstreamparticipation of loans.The recent survey of time deposits had confirmed the long-standing practice of many small banks in the Seventh District touse time certificates of deposit as well as passbook savings asvehicles for acquiring deposits. In Iowa, for example, 44 per centof total time deposits were in certificates, and only a negligibleamount ($3 million) were negotiable certificates of $100,000 or more.Aggressive postures on interest rates were revealed byrelatively few banks, Mr. Scanlon said. Only 38 per cent ofDistrict member banks paid as much as 4 per cent on savingsdeposits, only 11 per cent paid in excess of 4-1/2 per cent ontime certificates of deposit and open account time deposits, only 6/7/66-80-4 per cent paid in excess of 4-1/2 per cent on savings certificates,and only 2 per cent paid in excess of 4-1/2 per cent on othernonnegotiable certificates. Excluding negotiable CD's of $100,000or more, only 8 per cent of the District member banks paid morethan 4-1/2 per cent on any type of time deposit. Slightly morethan half the member banks--532--paid 4-1/2 per cent on some kindof time deposit, excluding large negotiable CD's.Reserve positions of the money market banks in the SeventhDistrict still were not showing strong pressure, although theywere less easy than a month ago. The amount of their CD's maturingin June was smaller than in March. Judging by past experience, thosebanks appeared in a position to meet any reasonable volume of creditdemands in the period just ahead.As to policy, it appeared desirable to Mr. Scanlon to limitmonetary and credit expansion to not much more than normal seasonalgrowth. If such expansion became inconsistent with the existingrate of net reserve availability, he would like to see somefurther reduction in the latter. He realized that the Committeedid not have a great deal of elbow room, and he certainly would notwant to move overtly, but he believed, if staff projections werecorrect, that the Committee must continue gradually to exercisemore restraint. While he could accept alternative A, with theproviso, he believed alternative B of the draft directives bestsuited the objectives for which he would strive. 6/7/66 -81-Mr. Clay commented that some sectors of the economy,principally automobiles and housing, had slackened their pacesomewhat. At the same time, the over-all level of economicactivity was increasing at such a rate that the growth in aggregatedemand for goods and services pressed hard on the economy'sresources and capacity to produce. As a reflection of thosedevelopments, nonagricultural prices continued their upwardmovement at the more rapid rate of recent months.The future pattern of economic activity could not be knownwith certainty, Mr. Clay observed, particularly without full know-ledge of the course of defense expenditures. What was known aboutprobable economic developments, however, suggested that the pressureof demand on resources and capacity would continue and that priceinflation would also remain a problem. Under the circumstances,monetary policy should continue to apply pressure on the commercialbanks and the financial markets.Developments in reserve aggregates and monetary variablesduring May had placed those measures in a more satisfactoryposition relative to monetary policy objectives for recent months,Mr. Clay continued. Staff projections indicated a substantialexpansion in aggregate financial measures in June. However,forthcoming developments surrounded the period with considerableuncertainty as to financial pressures in view of the large volume 6/7/66 -82-of scheduled private and public financing, the tax and dividendrequirements in the period, and the problem of the pattern ofsavings flows in the economy. The uncertainty probably would beintensified if Congress should pass restrictive legislation withrespect to time deposits.Draft directive A appeared to Mr. Clay appropriate for theperiod ahead, provided a less emphatic word such as "considerably"was substituted for the word "sharply" in the provisional clause.Whether or not specified in the directive itself, it also seemedto him that there should be an interest rate or money marketconstraint to avoid monetary policy actions that would precipitatea discount rate increase at this time.Mr. Clay said the Kansas City Reserve Bank did not haveevidence that borrowers at the discount window were net sellers ofFederal funds. The factor underlying the recent substantialincrease in country bank borrowing appeared to be the high demandfor agricultural and business credit during a period of tightmoney. The country banks felt the bite in that situation because(1) they lacked equal access to the CD market, and (2) city cor-respondent banks were limiting borrowing by their countrycorrespondents and were referring them to the Reserve Bank. Atotal of 172 banks had borrowed from the Kansas City Bank thisyear compared to 120 last year. Forty-two of those did not borrow 6/7/66 -83-at any time during 1965, and several had never borrowed beforefrom the Federal Reserve. That might be proving that there wassome real advantage to System membership.Mr. Wayne said that the latest information contained ratherdefinite evidence of slower growth in some sectors of Fifth Districtbusiness. Building permits, curbed by a dwindling supply ofmortgage money, dropped in April to the lowest level in nearly ayear. In the Richmond Reserve Bank's latest survey, manufacturers'new orders showed virtually no increase for the first time sincelast July, and the rise in factory shipments was considerably smallerthan earlier this year. Backlogs continued high, however, andfactory employment, hours, and wages showed further gains. Upwardpressure on prices also continued.Mr. Wayne reported that there had been some rise in countrybank borrowings in the Fifth District, although the total thus farremained relatively small. A number of banks had been contacted,but regardless of the reasons they advanced for borrowing it seemedto him that the general pattern of borrowings was one that shouldbe expected in a period of tight money with limited opportunitiesfor obtaining funds. No evidence had been found of banks sellingFederal funds during a period in which they were borrowing.With respect to the comments that had been made regardingsavings banks, Mr. Wayne noted that there were a few large savings 6/7/66 -84-banks in the Fifth District, in the Baltimore area. Several ofthem had expressed some concern about possible developments inthe period ahead, but thus far none had raised the question ofobtaining relief through the Reserve Bank.In the policy area, Mr. Wayne said, the Committee probablywas now in the critical phase of the difficult and delicate taskof slowing the present boom to a sustainable pace without reversingthe direction of the economy. For that difficult period, hesuggested a policy of holding about the present level of reserveavailability but with a safeguard to insure against inadvertentincreases in reserves, bank credit, and the money supply. He woulddo that by again gearing the directive to required reserves.Mr. Wayne noted that excess demand continued to show itselfin several places. Unfilled orders for durable goods continuedtheir steady and strong rise. Plans for business investment showedsome signs of leveling off but still were too high to be sustained.Those and other inflationary factors should not be discounted, butperhaps with a little more time they would yield to a continuationof present monetary pressures.Mr. Wayne commented that the directive adopted last timeseemed to have worked well, perhaps with the aid of favorable marketconditions and good projections. He would like to keep that formatand maintain about the same level of reserve availability unless 6/7/66 -85-required reserves should rise appreciably. If the latter shouldhappen, a move should be made toward larger net borrowed reserves.Alternative A of the draft directives, with the parentheticalphrase included, expressed a position that seemed appropriate,but he would like to see some reference in the first paragraphto the situation in the mortgage market and its implications forhousing. Without some such reference, the first paragraph seemedto support alternative B for the second paragraph rather than A.Mr. Shepardson commented that while there were indicationsof a slowdown in some sectors of the economy the general levelof activity was still advancing, with heavy pressure of demandsagainst resources, a tight labor market, scarcity of skilled laborin many areas, and a continuing rise in prices. At the same timethere were pressures ahead around the tax and dividend dates,concern about the mortgage market, and concern about the effectsof a possible excessive shifting of funds among financialintermediaries. Those factors presented somewhat conflictingindications. Mr. Reynolds' report on the balance of paymentssituation seemed highly significant. Current price developmentswould have implications for subsequent wage negotiations, and anyfurther deterioration in the price and wage situation could haveserious effects on the competitive position of the U.S., on thetrade balance, and on the total balance of payments. 6/7/66 -86-Mr. Shepardson thought that those considerations, on bawarranted pursuing a policy of further restraint while avoidingovert action. As he understood the discussion, the Committee sthad some leeway available to move toward the $400 million levelnet borrowed reserves. Mr. Treiber had mentioned moving towardthat level within the framework of alternative A of the draftdirectives. However, it seemed to him (Mr. Shepardson) that sucha policy was better described in alternative B, and he preferredthat alternative.Mr. Mitchell said he would make just one remark aboutborrowings before turning to the language of the directive. Itseemed to him that the System was not using the discount rate asa restraint; at present levels of the Federal funds rate the discountrate would have to be raised to 5-1/2 or 6 per cent to offerimportant restraint, and no one advocated such an increase. Thus,it was up to the Reserve Banks to exercise as much restraint aspossible by persuading member banks to turn borrowers away. Denyingdiscounting facilities to banks that were selling Federal funds wasone means of doing so. He hoped the Reserve Banks would continuetheir efforts to restrain member bank lending and perhapsintensify them, because such efforts might be the only way toavoid an increase in the discount rate, which could provecatastrophic. 6/7/66 -87-Mr. Mitchell agreed with much of what Mr. Wayne had saidabout the directive. He thought it was important to guard againsta repetition of the banking developments of March and April, andhe would favor some further reduction in net reserve availabilityif required reserves expanded significantly more than seasonallyexpected. Unless that happened, however, he would go along with-out much further change in net borrowed reserves. He stillfavored the revision in the first sentence of the directive that hehad suggested earlier today, and he agreed that it would beadvisable to include a statement about the mortgage market.Mr. Maisel reported that Mr. Daane, who had withdrawn fromthe meeting earlier to keep another engagement, had indicatedbefore leaving that he favored alternative A of the draft directives.On the savings bank matter referred to earlier byMr. Treiber, Mr. Maisel said he hoped there could be a Systemapproach to the problem, which was an important one.As to the directive, it seemed to Mr. Maisel that bankingdevelopments were now on the right path, and he interpretedalternative A as calling for guarding against leaving that path.Therefore he preferred A. Conditions now with respect to the majormonetary variables were just about what the Committee had expected.Over the next month or two the Committee would have to face up tothe question of what goals it expected monetary policy to achieve. 6/7/66 -88-In his opinion the goals that some people were setting up were notproperly goals of monetary policy; the country could not be runthrough monetary policy alone.Mr. Brimmer said he favored alternative A of the drafts forthe second paragraph of the directive and would leave open for thetime being the question of whether to include the proviso.Regarding the balance of payments, Mr. Brimmer thought theproblems involved were for the most part beyond the reach ofmonetary policy. Of the five problem areas noted by Mr. Reynolds,there was only one about which the Committee could do much in thenear future--it might be able to induce commercial banks to lendless abroad. He detected nothing in the Administration's attitudeto indicate that it regarded the previously announced balance ofpayments target as serious. On the contrary, recent speeches byofficials suggested that the Administration had decided to runthe risk of further losses of gold in preference to calling forcorrective but unpopular measures. He would prefer not to seethe Committee try to make up for the lack of Administrationresponsiveness to the balance of payments problem. Thus, unlikeMr. Shepardson, he thought that the deterioration in the U.S.balance of payments position was not a good reason for a furthertightening of policy. 6/7/66 -89-With respect to the domestic scene, Mr. Brimmer expressedparticular interest in Mr. Brill's opening remark reportingMr. Noyes' advice not to let the Committee overstay a tight policy.The present was a particularly troublesome time for forecasters.The evidence was mixed, and while he personally believed that theeconomy was in for another upswing, he was not certain of hisjudgment. Given the lags in the available data, the Committeemight fail to recognize quickly a weakening in the underpinningsof the economy. Accordingly, he would want to be a little cautious.There were various other reasons for caution, including conditionsin the mortgage market, concerning which he had a sentence topropose for inclusion in the directive. The financial problemsahead might be more serious than any that had been faced by thepresent generation, and the Committee should keep in mind itsresponsibility for the financial system as a whole and not justthe commercial banks. In that connection, he was impressed bythe imagination shown in New York, and perhaps elsewhere, inlooking into the steps that might be taken to deal with the savingsbank problem. He agreed with Mr. Maisel that a System-wideapproach to that problem would be desirable.Turning to the directive, Mr. Brimmer suggested retainingthe opening sentence of the first paragraph as drafted by the staff,and following it with a new sentence reading, "There is also much 6/7/66 -90-uncertainty about the mortgage market and the liquidity of nonbankfinancial institutions." As he had indicated, he preferredalternative A for the second paragraph and he thought the Managermight focus on $350 million as his target for net borrowed reserveHe had not taken a position with respect to the proviso because hewas inclined to suggest that the Manager be given substantialleeway to depart from the net borrowed reserve target if unusualcircumstances developed in financial markets, letting them fallaway from the $350 million figure if necessary. He doubted that theseasonal factors available were adequate for dealing with thesituation that lay ahead.Mr. MacDonald observed that the flow of business newssuggested that the economic expansion was proceeding, momentarily,at a less frenetic pace than in the first quarter. Confirmationcould be found in the recent behavior of such series as retailsales, new orders and shipments of durable goods, industrialproduction, construction, industrial prices, and personal income.Nevertheless, those series were erratic--one swallow did not makea summer and one month did not make a trend. To the extent thatthere had been moderation, it had been helped by the slide in autosales and cutbacks in car production, which were likely to havefurther effects as they spread into ancillary industries such assteel, rubber, and glass. 6/7/66 -91-Whether it would be possible to recapture the balance inthe economy that prevailed earlier in the business expansionremained to be seen, Mr. MacDonald noted. In any event, thereseemed to be less inflationary pressure at the moment than earlierthis year. He was glad to see that the restrained performance ofmonetary measures in May largely counteracted the inflationaryApril showing, and that projections for June indicated figuresreasonably close to the Committee's objective. The desired degreeof monetary restraint might thus have been reached, at least forthe time being.Mr. MacDonald reported that most economic developments inthe Fourth District had been consistent with the national pattern,although the regional measures had by no means behaved uniformly.On the side of moderation, gains in manufacturing activity appearedto have slackened recently in several major District centers.District steel production had remained high, but new ordersreceived by the reporting steel producers declined slightly in May,on a seasonally adjusted basis. Auto sales and department storesales in the District had slipped thus far in the second quarter,and construction contracts, after climbing through February,turned down in succeeding months.On a stronger note, Mr. MacDonald added, insured unemploy-ment in major labor markets of the Fourth District had continued 6/7/66 -92-to edge down, reaching the low figure of 1.1 per cent; in 5 of the14 major labor markets the rate was less than 1 per cent. TheReserve Bank's spring survey of capital spending plans in Clevelandand Cincinnati found that business firms had upgraded theirestimates of spending for 1966 since the fall survey. The change inpart reflected a carryover of capital outlays from 1965 into thisyear.Mr. MacDonald reported that banking statistics for Januarythrough April showed that credit expansion in the District hadbeen considerably larger at banks outside major cities than atweekly reporting banks, which suggested that, as of April, the fulleffects of tighter monetary policy were still to be felt bycountry banks.With reference to the borrowing of country banks at thediscount window, Mr. MacDonald said that during the first five monthsof 1966 such borrowing was up 40 per cent from the year-earlierperiod--about the same as in the nation. Daily average borrowingsof the District's country banks had more than doubled since March,but still accounted for only about 1 per cent of total country bankborrowing. Ten of the banks that borrowed this year had notborrowed from the Reserve Bank in the past three years. Inseveral cases the borrowing reportedly was caused by increasedloan demand stemming from use of credit lines by branches of 6/7/66 -93-national corporations that had been unable to obtain sufficientfunds in money market centers.Recent data provided no evidence of a significant shift inthe pattern of banks' use of the discount window and transactionsin Federal funds. Occasionally, large banks found themselves over-sold on Federal funds and turned to the discount window. Nocountry banks had been found that simultaneously borrowed from theReserve Bank and sold Federal funds.As for monetary policy during the next three weeks,Mr. MacDonald expressed a preference for alternative A, as draftedby the staff, for reasons already given by others.Mr. Hilkert reported that several indicators pointed tosome slackening of pressures on economic resources in the ThirdDistrict. Although the labor force in the District was more fullyemployed than at any time since the Korean War, gains in manufac-turing employment had lessened and demand for labor (reflected inhelp-wanted indexes) had ceased to expand. Also, nonresidentialconstruction in the District had lagged so far this year, andauto registrations for the year to date were under 1965 totals.Superimposed upon those factors in the real economy,pressures in the mortgage market had been building rapidly inintensity. Inasmuch as the Philadelphia Reserve Bank made a surveyof mortgage conditions four weeks ago and just recently updated it, 6/7/66 -94-it had been able to observe that build-up. The surveys indicatedthe same kind of cuts in new mortgage commitments that had alreadybeen reported for most other Districts. One difference observedin the Bank's two surveys, however, was in the reasons given forthe abrupt change in policy with respect to mortgages. AroundMay 1, savings and loan officials blamed CD's, nearly exclusively,for the net savings outflow. But since then few had foundconvincing evidence that the money did go to the commercialbanks. Almost all interviewed admitted frankly they did not knowwhere the money was going. Another difference was in connectionwith mortgage rates. FHA average mortgage discounts were 2 pointsin March, 3 in April, and 4-1/2 near the end of May. Whenmortgage lenders were surveyed around May 1, FHA did not expectan average 4-1/2 point discount until midsummer.During the past week the Philadelphia Reserve Bank also hadbeen in touch with several banks and finance companies to inquireabout automobile financing, Mr. Hilkert added. The banks and largerfinance companies reported a volume of business roughly similar tolast year's, or perhaps a bit higher, though borrowers were beingscreened more carefully. The medium and smaller-sized financecompanies, on the other hand, reported business off considerably,partly because of slipping demand but more importantly becausemoney was harder to get. If those findings accurately reflected 6/7/66 -95-developments throughout the nation, further complaints might soonbe expressed--this time in the area of consumer financing--aboutintense competition from the commercial banks.On the banking front in the Third District, country bankshad experienced slower growth in loans and investments so far thisyear than in 1965, with little pressure on the deposit side ofthe ledger. That was one reason, together with heavy participationin the Federal funds market, why there had not been the bulge inborrowing at the discount window that had characterized some otherReserve Banks. The number of country banks borrowing in recentweeks had not been out of line with comparable periods of the pasttwo years, and though there had been some pickup in amounts borrowedthe increase had not been substantial.The banks that had been borrowing at the window appeared tohave done so for a variety of reasons, Mr. Hilkert said. Forexample, a few larger country banks had experienced a rising loandemand from large firms that formerly borrowed in the money centersbut now were finding conditions there relatively tight. Also, thesubstantial increase in the Federal funds rate (and at times reducedavailability of such funds) had encouraged several banks to seekdiscount accommodation.It had been possible, Mr. Hilkert said, to keep close trackof borrowing at the discount window in relation to activity in 6/7/66 -96-Federal funds and other borrowing because the Reserve Bank hadbeen getting daily figures since February from all country bankson Federal funds transactions and other borrowing.Among country banks during the last four bi-weekly reserveperiods, some sold Federal funds during the same reserve periodin which they were borrowing at the discount window, and a fewsold small amounts on days when they were borrowing. However,there was no evidence of that being a regular practice by anycountry bank. Two of the six city banks that made a market inFederal funds for correspondents had borrowed during the pasteight weekly reserve periods. Each bank sold Federal funds duringthose periods, and on days during which they were borrowing.Typically, city banks reduced their sales of Federal funds whenthey borrowed at the window.Although no pattern had emerged, Mr. Hilkert added, theReserve Bank had noticed some factors responsible on occasionfor simultaneous Federal funds sales and borrowing from theFederal Reserve by country banks. There had been a case in whichthe country bank had an agreement with its correspondent to sellFederal funds daily; then, when a need arose, it borrowed fromthe Reserve Bank instead of cutting back Federal funds sales.A second case was one in which the country bank used an inflow offunds to sell Federal funds instead of paying off an existingnote at the Reserve Bank. 6/7/66Mr. Hilkert observed that the Reserve Bank would be in aposition to see whether or not those practices increased as itobtained more experience with the Federal funds and otherborrowing figures on a daily reporting basis. No doubt questionswould arise as to proper administration of the discount window.It seemed obvious, however, that uniformity in policing thosepractices would be desirable.Mr. Patterson submitted the following statement for therecord:In the Sixth District we note the same moderatinginfluences evident in the rest of the country. Thesehave extended to a variety of economic and financialseries. Declines have shown up not only in retailsales and construction contracts, but also in employ-ment. It may be that some of the employment gains inthe early part of the year borrowed from the mostrecent period. Of course, we still find a considerableshortage of labor, especially skilled help. Nevertheless,it seems to us that the pressures, even for labor, haveabated somewhat.Having said this, I don't want to attach undueimportance to the declines that have occurred. Thedip in auto sales has not been large. And even inthe case of construction the drop has been small,although our survey would indicate that the worst isyet to come.That there has been a decided change in underlyingDistrict developments is quite clear, however. It showsup, for instance, in a reduction in the willingness ofconsumers to borrow, not only for autos but for otherpurposes as well. In our large cities there has beena slowing down in the over-all loan expansion. It ishard to tell to what degree that is traceable to asoftening in credit demands. It may well be partlyself-imposed, and it may also reflect the impact ofour own policy actions.-97- 6/7/66It is always difficult to see the effects of creditrestraint when first applied. But as we all know, thosebecome cumulative and eventually show sizable results.We are now seeing some evidence of this in the nationalhousing sector, although the root of the problem thereseems to be also partly a matter of bank competitionand a decline in the demand for housing per se.Rather than feeling uncomfortable that there hasbeen a slowing up in theeconomy, I would think that thisis what we hoped would happen, especially since no taxincrease seems to be in the offing. If the economy hadnot responded, I would have been very much disappointed.Therefore, I think it would be a distinct mistake if wewere to ease our policy now.On the other hand, I wonder if housing is not feelingmore of an impact than we anticipated and bargained for.This consideration, plus the fact that theeconomy seemsless overheated than it has been, suggests that this isnot the time for additional credit restraint. I amfurther persuaded in this conclusion by the agencies'marketing problems, the mid-June money market pressures,and the Treasury's prospective borrowing requirements.My feeling is that while caution is the watchwordtoday, some difficult decisions on the discount rate andRegulation Q lie ahead. The number of banks paying5 per cent on savings certificates seems to have increasedsharply, in our District at least, and in some casesbanks have gone to 5-1/2 per cent. We, too, have foundan increasing number of country banks using the discountwindow. This increase--only partly seasonal--seems toreflect a certain amount of unwillingness to take capitallosses on securities in the face of still relativelystrong loan demands and moderating deposit increases.There is little evidence that banks are trying to borrowat the discount window and are also selling Federalfunds, but policing may become a problem. For thisreason, discount rate action may well become a necessity.On the matter of open market policy, Mr. Patterson saidthat in general he favored the approach taken in the directive atthe last meeting. Today, however, he would not resist the increasein required reserves for June projected by the staff, unless that-98- 6/7/66 -99-increase turned out much greater than presently anticipated. Hewould go along with alternative A of the draft directives.Mr. Lewis reported that economic activity in the EighthDistrict continued to show great strength. Personal income hadrisen at about a 10 per cent annual rate since last fall, andspending, as measured by the flow of check payments, had increasedat a 7-1/2 per cent rate. The greater demand for goods andservices was straining production and credit facilities and placingupward pressure on prices. Real output, as estimated from indus-trial use of electric power, had increased at about a 5 per centannual rate since late last year, and total employment had risenat a very sharp 7 per cent rate. Particularly rapid gainsoccurred in manufacturing employment at St. Louis and Memphis.Unemployment, which averaged about 3.4 per cent of the Districtlabor force in late 1965, had been down to about 3.1 per centsince March.Total credit at Eighth District weekly reporting bankshad expanded at an 11 per cent annual rate since December, comparedwith an 8 per cent rate in the nation. Loans had risen at a15 per cent rate and bank investments had increased slightly.Business loans in the District had advanced at an unusually large25 per cent annual rate since December, with an especially strong growthin St. Louis. Firms in most industrial categories were large net 6/7/66 -100-borrowers. Bank deposits had expanded at a 6 per cent rate sinceDecember, with much of the growth in demand deposits. An exceptionto the strong growth in bank deposits and loans had occurred inthe Memphis area. Deposits in Memphis had shown only a slightrise over the past two years, evidently because those banks hadbeen less competitive in rates paid on time deposits due to a4 per cent Tennessee limitation. With a lack of growth in fundsavailable, outstanding business loans at Memphis banks had changedlittle on balance in nearly two years.Mr. Lewis reported that 25 country banks had borrowed inthe first five months of 1966. That was three and one-half timesthe number that borrowed in the first five months of 1965. Theamount borrowed in the past three months had averaged about doublethe average of last winter. Reasons given for the greater borrowingincluded strong loan demands and increased difficulty of gettingaccommodation from correspondent banks. One bank reported thatit had lost some deposits because competitors were offering higherrates on time accounts. Only one country bank had sold Federalfunds in the same period in which it borrowed; that bank sold onthe last two days of the reserve period but then paid out. Severalreserve city banks had sold Federal funds during periods in whichthey borrowed, but were heavy net buyers rather than net sellers. 6/7/66 -101-Upward pressure continued on prices, Mr. Lewis noted. Forexample, in the St. Louis area there had been marked increases inwages of construction workers, the cost of building materials hadrisen sharply, and the delivery period on certain key items hadlengthened considerably. As a result, builders reported that thecost of constructing a residence was 5 to 10 per cent higher thanjust a few months ago. Over-all consumer prices in the St. Louisarea had risen at a 4 per cent annual rate since last September.In summary, Mr. Lewis said, demands for goods and serviceshad been unusually strong, probably excessive, in the EighthDistrict, as in the rest of the nation.Mr. Robertson submitted the following statement for therecord after presenting a brief oral summary:It seems to me we are in a continuing strong basiceconomic situation, but one in which monetary restraintcan finally be said to be having some real bite ondemands for resources. This is obviously true in theconstruction field; it may also turn out to be one ofthe contributing factors to the lower level of automobilesales; and in numerous other areas of spending we hearat least an occasional story of some spending decisionaltered by the money situation.As a matter of fact, there is an increased outcryfrom some of these areas that tight money is biting toomuch. A good part of this is special pleading, ofcourse, but some of the results of restraint--particularlyin housing--may be drastic enough to deserve some attention.I, myself, would prefer any remedial action on this frontto come through appropriate amendment of Regulation Q,rather than any easing of our general policy of restraint.But I think such developments do suggest that we might 6/7/66have carried our progressive tightening about far enoughat this juncture, and that a policy of holding firmabout where we are might be the best decision for us toreach today.I am reinforced in this view by the behavior ofthe banking aggregates during May, when we finallymanaged to achieve some wiping out of the big March-April bulge. I hope our present degree of tightnesswill suffice to keep any June bulge smaller in size andmore temporary in duration. To guard against any newwave of outsize expansion in bank credit, however, Iwould again like to tell the Manager to be guided inpart by the strength of over-all bank expansion. To bemore explicit, thinking of his general operating targetas net borrowed reserves in the neighborhood of$350 million, I would have him run net borrowed reservesup to $100 million deeper than that if required reservesshould expand substantially more than seasonallyexpected; and, by the same token, I would be ready tosee him work net borrowed reserves down to as littleas $250 million if required reserves should be so muchweaker than expectations as to produce a seasonallyadjusted decline.I should add that I recognize the month of Junemay also bring some special money market pressures--from such things as tax date borrowing needs andFederal agency financings--that will complicate theManager's job. As I said last time, I am sure no onehere wants to be recommending actions that woulddisrupt the markets, and the Manager may have tooccasionally take this possibility into account inshaping his operations. But I think this kind ofinstruction is and always has been implicit in theCommittee's directive, and needs no spelling out.Indeed, it would be a very complex job even to try toexpress its scope and limitations in black and white,and it would be misleading if we tried to subsume allsuch complexities in the shorthand of a pet phraselike "taking account of money market conditions."Therefore, I would not favor inserting an explicitreference to "money market conditions" in the directive.I think we are better advised in this area to rely uponthe Manager's discretion, meanwhile keeping our formaldirective aimed consistently at the target of reserveavailability.-102- 6/7/66 -103-All things considered, I would favor alternative Aof the directive drafts presented to us by the staff,but I would want to see the phrases referring to moneymarket conditions stricken on the grounds that theyeither imply too much or are not necessary, dependingon which of their two possible meanings one might wantto stress. I would, of course, want to see includedthe parenthetical reference to adjusting operations inthe light of the movement of required reserves.Mr. Robertson added that he shared the view that somereference be made in the first sentence of the directive tofactors that would argue for holding the present degree of firmnessat this juncture rather than tightening further. He would suggestlanguage such as "the mortgage market is tight, automobile saleshave fallen off, and concern exists about the liquidity of nonbankfinancial institutions."Chairman Martin noted that a majority of the Committee hadexpressed a preference for alternative A for the second paragraphof the directive and that, on the whole, the members did notappear to be far apart in their views on policy. He proposed thatthe Committee proceed by considering the various suggestions thathad been made for revising the draft directive. A discussion ofwording of the directive ensued.Thereupon, upon motion duly madeand seconded, and by unanimous vote,the Federal Reserve Bank of New Yorkwas authorized and directed, untilotherwise directed by the Committee,to execute transactions in the SystemAccount in accordance with the follow-ing current economic policy directive: 6/7/66 -104-The economic and financial developments reviewed atthis meeting indicate that, while the mortgage market istight, automobile sales have fallen off, and some concernexists about the liquidity of nonbank financial institu-tions, the domestic economy is continuing to expand,with industrial prices rising further and credit demandsremaining strong. The foreign trade surplus has declinedand the international payments deficit has increased.In this situation, it is the Federal Open Market Committee'spolicy to resist inflationary pressures and to strengthenefforts to restore reasonable equilibrium in the country'sbalance of payments, by restricting the growth in thereserve base, bank credit, and the money supply.To implement this policy, System open marketoperations until the next meeting of the Committee shallbe conducted with a view to maintaing net reserve avail-ability and related money market conditions in abouttheir recent ranges; provided, however, that if requiredreserves expand considerably more than seasonally expected,operations shall be conducted with a view to attainingsome further gradual reduction in net reserve availabilityand firming of money market conditions.Chairman Martin then observed that the members of the Boardof Governors were to appear before the Committee on Banking andCurrency of the House of Representatives tomorrow (June 8) regardinglegislative proposals affecting financial institutions. A letterdated June 6 had been received from Chairman Wright Patman of theCommittee asking for an expression of views on a four-part proposal,one part of which had to do with permitting open market purchasesby the Federal Reserve System of any obligation which was a directobligation of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interestby, any Federal Home Loan Bank. The Chairman thought that mattershould be discussed today since it related to the Committee'sresponsibilities. 6/7/66 -105-Mr. Treiber inquired about the present eligibility forpurchase by the System of Federal Home Loan Bank obilgations.Mr. Hackley replied that under section 14(b) of the FederalReserve Act the Reserve Banks could operate only in direct orfully guaranteed obligations of the U.S. Since there was a specificstatutory provision that Federal Home Loan Bank obligations werenot obligations of, and were not guaranteed by, the U.S. they werenot eligible.Mr. Maisel remarked that if the Board was to commentfavorably on any legislation in the area he would hope that itwould urge including a broader list of agency issues than simplyFHLB obligations.Chairman Martin said he thought everyone would agree onthat point, and Mr. Treiber indicated that his initial reactionalso was against a piece-meal approach to the question.Mr. Cardon noted that in testimony before the HouseCommittee today Under Secretary of the Treasury Barr had submitteda list of agency obligations that were not eligible for purchaseby the Federal Reserve Banks. Mr. Barr had expressed the viewthat it would be consistent to make FHLB obligations eligible andhad indicated that the Administration would have no objection tosuch legislation.In reply to a question by Chairman Martin, Mr. Hackley 6/7/66 -106-categorically how many agency issues were now eligible. Mr. Forrestalof the Board's Legal Division had prepared a memorandum for theBoard on April 13, 1966, listing a number of obligations believedto be eligible either because of specific statutory provisions forfull guarantee by the U.S. or because they fell within a 1961opinion by the Attorney General concerning obligations guaranteedby Government agencies. (Note: Subsequent to the meeting copiesof Mr. Forrestal's memorandum were distributed to the Committeeand a copy was placed in the Committee's files.)Mr. Maisel commented that while the list of eligible issueswas long, it consisted mainly of obligations of minor agenciesaccounting for a relatively small percentage of all agency issues.Mr. Swan agreed that the question should be approached interms of all agency issues rather than FHLB obligations alone.However, in view of the importance of the subject and the like-lihood that heavy reliance on agency issues in lieu of directTreasury obligations would not prove to be a temporary procedure,he thought the Committee should give very careful considerationto the desirability of making all agency issues eligible, and ofconducting open market operations in them along with operationsin direct obligations of the Treasury.Mr. Treiber remarked that the Federal Home Loan Banks hadauthority to borrow directly from the Treasury, and presumably 6/7/66 -107-would do so if they were unable to raise needed funds in the market.The System probably would be less subject to pressures if itconfined its operations to Treasury securities. Of course, ifpurchases of FHLB obligations were begun the Committee could stillmaintain its desired credit policy by not acquiring an equivalentamount of Treasury securities.Mr. Swan noted that there was a statutory limit of $1 billionon Home Loan Bank borrowing from the Treasury.Mr. Robertson said that it was difficult to oppose makingall agency issues eligible for System purchase on grounds ofprinciple. He agreed, however, that if they were made eligiblethe System was likely to be subject to a good deal of continuingpressure to buy them.Mr. Mitchell referred to Mr. Holmes' earlier commentregarding problems in operating in small issues, and asked whetherit would not be desirable to have some lower limit on the size ofissues that would be made eligible.Mr. Holmes said that, as he had indicated, there would bemany problems in operating in agency issues, including that whichhe had referred to as the problem of "even keel." He questionedwhether the System should be used to enable agencies to avoidpaying the rates necessary to float their issues in the market. 6/7/66 -108-Mr. Maisel noted that even if the law was changed theCommittee would still have to revise its Regulation and itscontinuing authority directive before the Account Management wouldbe authorized to operate in agency issues. In the process offormulating those revisions the Committee would have an opportu-nity to carefully consider the various kinds of operating problems.Mr. Brimmer commented that the matter of agency issues hadbeen under discussion for some time and he asked if Mr. Holmes hadgiven thought to possible procedures.Mr. Holmes replied that it probably would be desirable forthe System to have standing authority to buy agency issues, andthat it was hard to justify having some issues eligible and somenot. If the agency market continued to develop it was quitepossible that transactions in agency issues would prove workableas long as it was understood that they would be kept moderate insize and that they would be supplemental to operations in Treasurysecurities. A study might show that it would be easier to arrangerepurchase agreements against such securities than to deal in themon an outright basis. The use of RP's would give some support tounderwriters carrying enlarged positions, and from a technicalstandpoint it would be much easier to relate RP's to reserveobjectives than would be the case with outright transactions. 6/7/66 -109-Mr. Wayne said he understood that the System could notengage in repurchase agreements involving particular types ofsecurities unless it had the authority to buy such securities out-right. The alternatives would appear to be engaging in RP's againstagency issues or operating through the discount window, and of thetwo he would prefer the former. Accordingly, he did not think theSystem should oppose the legislation in question.Chairman Martin remarked that he had considerable trepidationabout the proposal because the System dealt in high-powered money.He would expect pressures for the System to operate in a wide rangeof agency issues regardless of possible consequences for the moneymarkets. He doubted that that would be a wise course to followif it could be avoided. In any case, the question had to be thoughtthrough carefully.Mr. Swan commented that the suggestion that the legislativeauthority should cover all agency issues rather than the specificissues of Federal Home Loan Banks left open the major question ofthe moment, as to what might be done if those Banks exhausted their$1 billion authority to borrow directly from the Treasury.Mr. Maisel noted in response that another alternative wasavailable; the Treasury had legal authority to deposit funds inthe Home Loan Banks. 6/7/66 -110-Mr. Brimmer suggested that it would be helpful if theManager prepared a memorandum on the general subject of operationsin agency issues for the Committee's use. It was agreed that sucha memorandum would be desirable.It was agreed the next meeting of the Committee would beheld on Tuesday, June 28, 1966, at 9:30 a.m.Thereupon the meeting adjourned.Secretary ATTACHMENT ACONFIDENTIAL (FR) June 6, 1966Drafts of Current Economic Policy Directive for Consideration by theFederal Open Market Committee at its Meeting on June 7, 1966.First paragraphThe economic and financial developments reviewed at thismeeting indicate that the domestic economy is continuing to expand,with industrial prices rising further and credit demands remainingstrong. Our foreign trade surplus has declined and the deficit inour international payments has increased. In this situation, it isthe Federal Open Market Committee's policy to resist inflationarypressures and to strengthen efforts to restore reasonable equilibriumin the country's balance of payments, by restricting the growth inthe reserve base, bank credit, and the money supply.Second paragraphAlternative A (preserving current firmness, with possible qualifica-tionTo implement this policy, System open market operationsuntil the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted witha view to maintaining net reserve availability and related moneymarket conditions in about their recent ranges (; provided,however, that if required reserves expand sharply more thanseasonally expected, operations shall be conducted with a viewto attaining some further gradual reduction in net reserveavailability and firming of money market conditions).Alternative B (continued firming, with degree conditioned bymovement in required reserves)To implement this policy, System open market operationsuntil the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with aview to attaining some further gradual reduction in net reserveavailability and attendant firming of money market conditions, andto attaining somewhat greater restraint if required reserves expandsharply more than seasonally expected.