 Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee October 29Œ30, 2013  A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tues-day, October 29, 2013, at 1:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, October 30, 2013, at 9:00 a.m.  PRESENT:  Ben Bernanke, Chairman William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman James Bullard Charles L. Evans Esther L. George Jerome H. Powell Eric Rosengren Jeremy C. Stein Daniel K. Tarullo Janet L. Yellen  Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, Sandra Pianalto, and Charles I. Plosser, Alternate Mem-bers of the Federal Open Market Committee  Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, and John C. Williams, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respec-tively  William B. English, Secretary and Economist Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel Steven B. Kamin, Economist David W. Wilcox, Economist  Thomas A. Connors, Michael P. Leahy, Stephen A. Meyer, Daniel G. Sullivan, Christopher J. Waller, and William Wascher, Associate Economists  Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account  Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Banking Su-pervision and Regulation, Board of Governors  James A. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of Mone-tary Affairs, Board of Governors Jon W. Faust, Special Adviser to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors  Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors  Trevor A. Reeve, Senior Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors  Ellen E. Meade and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors  Eric M. Engen, Michael T. Kiley, Thomas Laubach, and David E. Lebow, Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors  Marnie Gillis DeBoer, Deputy Associate Director, Di-vision of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors  Rochelle M. Edge, Assistant Director, Office of Finan-cial Stability Policy and Research, Board of Gover-nors  Eric Engstrom, Section Chief, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors  David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Mone-tary Affairs, Board of Governors  Mark A. Carlson, Senior Economist, Division of Mone-tary Affairs, Board of Governors; Robert J. Tetlow, Senior Economist, Division of Research and Statis-tics, Board of Governors  Blake Prichard, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia  David Altig, Glenn D. Rudebusch, and Mark S. Sniderman, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Re-serve Banks of Atlanta, San Francisco, and Cleve-land, respectively  Craig S. Hakkio, Evan F. Koenig, Lorie K. Logan, and Kei-Mu Yi, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Dallas, New York, and Min-neapolis, respectively   Anna Nordstrom and Giovanni Olivei, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York and Boston, respectively  Argia M. Sbordone, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York  Andreas L. Hornstein, Senior Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond  Satyajit Chatterjee, Senior Economic Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia  Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed-eral Reserve's Balance Sheet The Manager of the System Open Market Account reported on developments in domestic and foreign fi-nancial markets as well as System open market opera-tions, including the progress of the overnight reverse repurchase agreement operational exercise, during the period since the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) met on September 17Œ18, 2013.  By unani-mous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk's domestic transactions over the intermeeting period.  There were no intervention operations in foreign currencies for the System's account over the intermeeting period. The Committee considered a proposal to convert the existing temporary central bank liquidity swap ar-rangements to standing arrangements with no preset expiration dates.  The Manager described the proposed arrangements, noting that the Committee would still be asked to review participation in the arrangements an-nually.  A couple of participants expressed reservations about the proposal, citing opposition to swap lines with foreign central banks in general or questioning the gov-ernance implications of these standing arrangements in particular.  Following the discussion, the Committee unanimously approved the following resolution:  The Federal Open Market Committee di-rects the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to convert the existing temporary dollar li-quidity swap arrangements with the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the European Central Bank, and the Swiss National Bank to standing facilities, with the modifications approved by the Committee.  In addition, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Federal Re-serve Bank of New York to convert the ex-isting temporary foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements with the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the European Central Bank, and the Swiss Na-tional Bank to standing facilities, also with the modifications approved by the Commit-tee. Drawings on the dollar and foreign currency liquidity swap lines will be approved by the Chairman in consultation with the Foreign Currency Subcommittee.  The Foreign Cur-rency Subcommittee will consult with the Federal Open Market Committee prior to the initial drawing on the dollar or foreign currency liquidity swap lines if possible under the circumstances then prevailing; authority to approve subsequent drawings of a more routine character for either the dollar or for-eign currency liquidity swap lines may be del-egated to the Manager, in consultation with the Chairman. The Chairman may change the rates and fees on the swap arrangements by mutual agree-ment with the foreign central banks and in consultation with the Foreign Currency Sub-committee.  The Chairman shall keep the Federal Open Market Committee informed of any changes in rates or fees, and the rates and fees shall be consistent with principles discussed with and guidance provided by the Committee.  Staff Review of the Economic Situation In general, the data available at the time of the October 29Œ30 meeting suggested that economic activity con-tinued to rise at a moderate pace; the set of information reviewed for this meeting, however, was reduced somewhat by delays in selected statistical releases asso-ciated with the partial shutdown of the federal govern-ment earlier in the month.  In the labor market, total payroll employment increased further in September, but the unemployment rate was still high.  Consumer price inflation continued to be modest, and measures of longer-run inflation expectations remained stable. Private nonfarm employment rose in September but at a slower pace than in the previous month, while total government employment increased at a solid rate.  The unemployment rate edged down to 7.2 percent in Sep-tember; both the labor force participation rate and the employment-to-population ratio were unchanged.  Other recent indicators of labor market activity were mixed.  Measures of firms' hiring plans improved, the  rate of job openings increased slightly, and the rate of long-duration unemployment declined a little.  Howev-er, household expectations of the labor market situa-tion deteriorated somewhat, the rate of gross private-sector hiring remained flat, and the share of workers employed part time for economic reasons was essen-tially unchanged and continued to be elevated.  In addi-tion, initial claims for unemployment insurance rose in the first few weeks of October, likely reflecting, in part, some spillover effects from the government shutdown. Manufacturing production expanded modestly in Sep-tember, but output was flat outside of the motor vehi-cle sector and the rate of total manufacturing capacity utilization was unchanged.  Automakers' schedules in-dicated that the pace of light motor vehicle assemblies would be slightly lower in the coming months, but broader indicators of manufacturing production, such as the readings on new orders from the national and regional manufacturing surveys, pointed to further gains in factory output in the near term. Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) rose moderately in August.  In September, nominal retail sales, excluding those at motor vehicle and parts out-lets, increased significantly, while sales of light motor vehicles declined.  Recent readings on key factors that influence consumer spending were somewhat mixed:  Households' net worth likely expanded further as both equity values and home prices rose in recent months, and real disposable incomes increased solidly in Au-gust, but measures of consumer sentiment declined in September and October. The recovery in the housing sector appeared to contin-ue, although recent data in this sector were limited.  Starts and permits of new single-family homes in-creased in August, but starts and permits of multifamily units declined.  After falling significantly in July, sales of new homes increased in August, but existing home sales decreased, on balance, in August and September, and pending home sales also contracted. Growth in real private expenditures for business equipment and intellectual property products appeared to be tepid in the third quarter.  Nominal shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft rose mod-estly, on balance, in August and September after declin-ing in July.  However, nominal new orders for these capital goods continued to be above the level of ship-ments, pointing to increases in shipments in subse-quent months, and other forward-looking indicators, such as surveys of business conditions, were consistent with some gains in business equipment spending in the near term.  Nominal business expenditures for nonres-idential construction were essentially unchanged in Au-gust.  Recent book-value data for inventory-to-sales ratios, along with readings on inventories from national and regional manufacturing surveys, did not point to notable inventory imbalances. Real federal government purchases likely declined as federal employment edged down further in September and many federal employees were temporarily fur-loughed during the partial government shutdown in October.  Real state and local government purchases, however, appeared to increase; the payrolls of these governments expanded briskly in September, and nom-inal state and local construction expenditures rose in August.  The U.S. international trade deficit remained about un-changed in August, as both exports and imports were flat. Available measures of total U.S. consumer prices-the PCE price index for August and the consumer price index for September-increased modestly, as did the core measures, which exclude prices of food and ener-gy.  Both near- and longer-term inflation expectations from the Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers were little changed, on balance, in September and October.  Nominal average hourly earnings for all employees increased slowly in Septem-ber.     Foreign economic growth appeared to improve in the third quarter following a sluggish first half, largely re-flecting stronger growth estimated for China and a re-bound in Mexico from contraction in the previous quarter.  Growth also picked up in the third quarter in the United Kingdom, and available indicators suggested an increase in growth in Canada and continued mild recovery in the euro area.  Economic activity in Japan appeared to have decelerated somewhat from its first-half pace but continued to expand, and inflation meas-ured on a 12-month basis turned positive in the middle of this year.  Inflation elsewhere generally remained subdued.  Monetary policy stayed highly accommoda-tive in advanced foreign economies.  In addition, the Bank of Mexico continued to ease monetary policy, citing concerns about the strength of the economy, but central banks in certain other emerging market econo-mies, including Brazil and India, tightened policy and intervened in currency markets in response to concerns about the potential effect of currency depreciation on inflation.  Staff Review of the Financial Situation On balance over the intermeeting period, longer-term interest rates declined and equity prices rose, largely in response to expectations for more-accommodative monetary policy.  In addition, financial markets were affected for a time by uncertainties about raising the federal debt limit and resolving the government shut-down. Financial market views about the outlook for monetary policy shifted notably following the September FOMC meeting, as the outcome and communications from that meeting were seen as more accommodative than expected.  Investors pushed out their anticipated timing of both the first reduction in the pace of FOMC asset purchases and the first hike in the target federal funds rate.  The path of the federal funds rate implied by fi-nancial market quotes shifted down over the period, as did the path based on the results from the Desk's sur-vey of primary dealers.  The Desk's survey also indicat-ed that the dealers had revised up their expectations of the total size of the Committee's asset purchase pro-gram.  Concerns about the fiscal situation and some-what weaker-than-expected economic data releases also contributed to the change in expectations about the timing of monetary policy actions. Five- and 10-year yields on both nominal and inflation-protected Treasury securities declined 30 basis points or more over the intermeeting period.  The reduction in longer-term Treasury yields was also reflected in other longer-term rates, such as those on agency   mortgage-backed securities (MBS) and corporate secu-rities. Short-term funding markets were adversely affected for a time by concerns about potential delays in raising the federal debt limit.  The Treasury bill market was partic-ularly affected as yields on bills maturing between mid-October and early November rose sharply and some bill auctions saw reduced demand.  Conditions in other short-term markets, such as the market for repurchase agreements, were also strained.  However, these effects eased quickly after an agreement to raise the debt limit was reached in mid-October. Credit flows to nonfinancial businesses appeared to slow somewhat during the fiscal standoff amid in-creased market volatility; however, access to credit gen-erally remained ample for large firms.  Gross issuance of nonfinancial corporate bonds and commercial paper, which had been particularly strong in September, slowed a bit in October.  In September, leveraged loan issuance was also robust.  Commercial and industrial (C&I) loans at banks continued to advance, on balance, in the third quarter at about the pace posted in the pre-vious quarter, and commercial real estate (CRE) loans at banks rose moderately.  In response to the October Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS), banks generally indicated that they had eased standards on C&I and CRE loans over the past three months. Developments affecting financing for the household sector were generally favorable.  House prices posted further gains in August.  Mortgage rates declined over the intermeeting period, although they were still above their early-May lows.  Mortgage refinancing applica-tions were down dramatically compared with May, but purchase applications were only a bit below their earlier level.  Some large banks responding to the October SLOOS reported having eased standards on home-purchase loans to prime borrowers on net.  In non-mortgage credit, automobile loans and student loans continued to expand at a robust pace, while balances on revolving consumer credit were again about flat. In the municipal bond market, issuance of bonds for new capital projects remained solid.  Yields on 20-year general obligation municipal bonds decreased about in line with other longer-term market rates over the in-termeeting period. Bank credit declined slightly during the third quarter.  Growth of core loans slowed, primarily because of a sizable decline in outstanding balances of residential mortgages on banks' books.  Third-quarter earnings reports for large banks generally met or exceeded ana-lysts' modest expectations. M2 grew moderately in September.  Preliminary data indicated that growth in M2 picked up temporarily in early October amid uncertainty about the passage of debt limit legislation; deposits increased sharply as insti-tutional investors appeared to shift from money fund shares to bank deposits, and as money funds increased their bank deposits in anticipation of possible redemp-tions.  These inflows to deposits were estimated to have reversed shortly after the debt limit agreement was reached. Foreign stock prices rose, foreign yields and yield spreads declined, and the dollar depreciated against most other currencies.  A large portion of these asset price changes occurred immediately following the Sep-tember FOMC announcement.  In addition, yields and the value of the dollar fell further after the debt ceiling agreement was reached and in response to the U.S. la- bor market report.  Mutual fund flows to emerging markets stabilized, following large outflows earlier this year. Staff Economic Outlook In the economic projection prepared by the staff for the October FOMC meeting, the forecast for growth in real gross domestic product (GDP) in the near term was revised down somewhat from the one prepared for the previous meeting, primarily reflecting the effects of the federal government shutdown and some data on consumer spending that were softer than anticipated.  In contrast, the staff's medium-term forecast for real GDP was revised up slightly, mostly reflecting lower projected paths for the foreign exchange value of the dollar and longer-term interest rates, along with some-what higher projected paths for equity prices and home values.  The staff anticipated that the pace of expansion in real GDP this year would be about the same as the growth rate of potential output but continued to pro-ject that real GDP would accelerate in 2014 and 2015, supported by an easing in the effects of fiscal policy restraint on economic growth, increases in consumer and business sentiment, further improvements in credit availability and financial conditions, and accommoda-tive monetary policy.  Real GDP growth was projected to begin to slow a little in 2016 but to remain above potential output growth.  The expansion in economic activity was anticipated to slowly reduce resource slack over the projection period, and the unemployment rate was expected to decline gradually. The staff's forecast for inflation was little changed from the projection prepared for the previous FOMC meet-ing.  The staff continued to expect that inflation would be modest in the second half of this year, but higher than its level in the first half.  Over the medium term, with longer-run inflation expectations assumed to re-main stable, changes in commodity and import prices expected to be relatively small, and slack in labor and product markets persisting over most of the projection period, inflation was projected to run somewhat below the FOMC's longer-run inflation objective of 2 percent through 2016. The staff continued to see a number of risks around the forecast.  The downside risks to economic activity included the uncertain effects and future course of fis-cal policy, concerns about the outlook for consumer spending growth, and the potential effects on residen-tial construction of the increase in mortgage rates since the spring.  With regard to inflation, the staff saw risks both to the downside, that the low rates of core con-sumer price inflation posted earlier this year could be more persistent than anticipated, and to the upside, that unanticipated increases in energy or other commodity prices could emerge. Participants' Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook In their discussion of the economic situation and the outlook, meeting participants generally indicated that the broad contours of their medium-term economic projections had not changed materially since the Sep-tember meeting.  Although the incoming data suggest-ed that growth in the second half of 2013 might prove somewhat weaker than many of them had previously anticipated, participants broadly continued to project the pace of economic activity to pick up.  The accelera-tion over the medium term was expected to be bol-stered by the gradual abatement of headwinds that have been slowing the pace of economic recovery-such as household-sector deleveraging, tight credit conditions for some households and businesses, and fiscal re-straint-as well as improved prospects for global growth.  While downside risks to the outlook for the economy and the labor market were generally viewed as having diminished, on balance, since last fall, several significant risks remained, including the uncertain ef-fects of ongoing fiscal drag and of the continuing fiscal debate. Consumer spending appeared to have slowed some-what in the third quarter.  A number of participants noted that their outlook for stronger economic activity was contingent on a pickup in growth of consumer spending and reviewed the factors that might contrib-ute to such a development, including low interest rates, easing of debt burdens, continued gains in employ-ment, lower gasoline prices, higher real incomes, and higher household wealth boosted by rising home prices and equity values.  Nonetheless, consumer sentiment remained unusually low, posing a downside risk to the forecast, and uncertainty surrounding prospective fiscal deliberations could weigh further on consumer confi-dence.  A few participants commented that a pickup in the growth rates of economic activity or real disposable income could require improvements in productivity growth.  However, it was noted that slower growth in productivity might have become the norm. Business contacts generally reported continued moder-ate growth in sales, but remained cautious about ex-panding payrolls and capital expenditures.  Manufactur-ing activity in parts of the country was reported to have picked up, and auto sales remained strong.  Reports  from several Districts indicated that commercial real estate and housing-related business activity continued to advance.  In the agricultural sector, crop yields were healthy, farmland values were up, and lower crop prices were increasing the affordability of livestock feed.  Wage and cost pressures remained limited, but business contacts in some Districts mentioned that selected la-bor markets were tight or expressed concerns about a shortage of skilled workers.  Reports from the retail sector were mixed, with remarks about higher luxury sales and expectations for reduced hiring of seasonal workers over the upcoming holiday season.  Uncertain-ty about future fiscal policy and the regulatory envi-ronment, including changes in health care, were men-tioned as weighing on business planning. Participants generally saw the direct economic effects of the partial shutdown of the federal government as temporary and limited, but a number of them ex-pressed concern about the possible economic effects of repeated fiscal impasses on business and consumer confidence.  More broadly, fiscal policy, which has been exerting significant restraint on economic growth, was expected to become somewhat less restrictive over the forecast period.  Nonetheless, it was noted that the stance of fiscal policy was likely to remain one of the most important headwinds restraining growth over the medium term. Although a number of participants indicated that the September employment report was somewhat disap-pointing, they judged that the labor market continued to improve, albeit slowly.  The limited pace of gains in wages and payrolls, as well as the number of employees working part time for economic reasons, were men-tioned as evidence of substantial remaining slack in the labor market.  The drop in the unemployment rate over the past year, while welcome and significant, could overstate the degree of improvement in labor market conditions, in part because of the decline in the labor force participation rate.  However, a few participants offered reasons why recent readings on the unemploy-ment rate might provide an accurate assessment, on balance, of the extent of improvement in the labor market.  For instance, if the decline in labor force par-ticipation reflected decisions to retire, it was unlikely to be reversed, because retirees were unlikely to return to the labor force.  Furthermore, a secular decline in labor market dynamism, or turnover, might have contributed to a reduction in the size of normal monthly payroll gains.  Finally, revised data showed that the historical relationship between real GDP growth and changes in the unemployment rate had remained broadly in place in recent years, suggesting that the unemployment rate continued to provide a reasonably accurate signal about the strength of the labor market and the degree of slack in the economy. Available information suggested that inflation remained subdued and below the Committee's longer-run objec-tive of 2 percent.  Similarly, longer-run inflation expec-tations remained stable and, by some measures, below 2 percent. Financial conditions eased notably over the intermeet-ing period, with declines in longer-term interest rates and increases in equity values.  Financial quotes sug-gested that markets moved out the date at which they expected to see the Committee first increase the federal funds rate target.  It was noted that interest rate volatili-ty was substantially lower than at the time of the Sep-tember meeting, and a couple of participants pointed to signs suggesting that reaching-for-yield behavior might be increasing again.  Nevertheless, term premiums ap-peared to only partially retrace their rise of earlier in the year, and longer-term interest rates remained well above their levels in the spring.  A few participants ex-pressed concerns about the eventual economic impact of the change in financial conditions since the spring; in particular, increases in mortgage rates and home prices had reduced the affordability of housing, and the high-er rates were at least partly responsible for some slow-ing in that sector.  One participant stated that the ex-tended period of near-zero interest rates continued to create challenges for the banking industry, as net inter-est margins remained under pressure. Policy Planning After an introductory briefing by the staff, meeting par-ticipants had a wide-ranging discussion of topics related to the path of monetary policy over the medium term, including strategic and communication issues associat-ed with the Committee's asset purchase program as well as possibilities for clarifying or strengthening its forward guidance for the federal funds rate.  In this context, participants discussed the financial market re-sponse to the Committee's decisions at its June and September meetings and, more generally, the complexi-ties associated with communications about the Com-mittee's current policy tools.  A number of participants noted that recent movements in interest rates and other indicators suggested that financial markets viewed the Committee's tools-asset purchases and forward guid-ance regarding the federal funds rate-as closely linked.  One possible explanation for this view was an inference on the part of investors that a change in asset purchas- es reflected a change in the Committee's outlook for the economy, which would be associated with adjust-ments in both the purchase program and the expected path of policy rates; another was a perspective that a change in asset purchases would be read as providing information about the willingness of the Committee to pursue its economic objectives with both tools.  A couple of participants observed that the decision at the September FOMC meeting might have strengthened the credibility of monetary policy, as suggested by the downward shift in the expected path of short-term in-terest rates that had brought the path more closely into alignment with the Committee's forward guidance.  Participants broadly endorsed making the Committee's communications as simple, clear, and consistent as pos-sible, and discussed ways of doing so.  With regard to the asset purchase program, one suggestion was to re-peat a set of principles in public communications; for example, participants could emphasize that the pro-gram was data dependent, that any reduction in the pace of purchases would depend on both the cumula-tive progress in labor markets since the start of the program as well as the outlook for future gains, and that a continuing assessment of the efficacy and costs of asset purchases might lead the Committee to decide at some point to change the mix of its policy tools while maintaining a high degree of accommodation.  Another suggestion for enhancing communications was to use the Summary of Economic Projections to pro-vide more information about participants' views. During this general discussion of policy strategy and tactics, participants reviewed issues specific to the Committee's asset purchase program.  They generally expected that the data would prove consistent with the Committee's outlook for ongoing improvement in la-bor market conditions and would thus warrant trim-ming the pace of purchases in coming months.  How-ever, participants also considered scenarios under which it might, at some stage, be appropriate to begin to wind down the program before an unambiguous further improvement in the outlook was apparent.  A couple of participants thought it premature to focus on this latter eventuality, observing that the purchase pro-gram had been effective and that more time was need-ed to assess the outlook for the labor market and infla-tion; moreover, international comparisons suggested that the Federal Reserve's balance sheet retained ample capacity relative to the scale of the U.S. economy.  Nonetheless, some participants noted that, if the Committee were going to contemplate cutting purchas-es in the future based on criteria other than improve-ment in the labor market outlook, such as concerns about the efficacy or costs of further asset purchases, it would need to communicate effectively about those other criteria.  In those circumstances, it might well be appropriate to offset the effects of reduced purchases by undertaking alternative actions to provide accom-modation at the same time. Participants generally expressed reservations about the possibility of introducing a simple mechanical rule that would adjust the pace of asset purchases automatically based on a single variable such as the unemployment rate or payroll employment.  While some were open to considering such a rule, others viewed that approach as unlikely to reliably produce appropriate policy out-comes.  As an alternative, some participants mentioned that it might be preferable to adopt an even simpler plan and announce a total size of remaining purchases or a timetable for winding down the program.  A     calendar-based step-down would run counter to the data-dependent, state-contingent nature of the current asset purchase program, but it would be easier to communicate and might help the public separate the Committee's purchase program from its policy for the federal funds rate and the overall stance of policy.  With regard to future reductions in asset purchases, participants discussed how those might be split across asset classes.  A number of participants believed that making roughly equal adjustments to purchases of Treasury securities and MBS would be appropriate and relatively straightforward to communicate to the public.  However, some others indicated that they could back trimming the pace of Treasury purchases more rapidly than those of MBS, perhaps to signal an intention to support mortgage markets, and one participant thought that trimming MBS first would reduce the potential for distortions in credit allocation. As part of the planning discussion, participants also examined several possibilities for clarifying or strength-ening the forward guidance for the federal funds rate, including by providing additional information about the likely path of the rate either after one of the economic thresholds in the current guidance was reached or after the funds rate target was eventually raised from its cur-rent, exceptionally low level.  A couple of participants favored simply reducing the 6½ percent unemployment rate threshold, but others noted that such a change might raise concerns about the durability of the Com-mittee's commitment to the thresholds.  Participants also weighed the merits of stating that, even after the unemployment rate dropped below 6½ percent, the target for the federal funds rate would not be raised so  long as the inflation rate was projected to run below a given level.  In general, the benefits of adding this kind of quantitative floor for inflation were viewed as uncer-tain and likely to be rather modest, and communicating it could present challenges, but a few participants re-mained favorably inclined toward it.  Several partici-pants concluded that providing additional qualitative information on the Committee's intentions regarding the federal funds rate after the unemployment thresh-old was reached could be more helpful.  Such guidance could indicate the range of information that the Com-mittee would consider in evaluating when it would be appropriate to raise the federal funds rate.  Alternative-ly, the policy statement could indicate that even after the first increase in the federal funds rate target, the Committee anticipated keeping the rate below its   longer-run equilibrium value for some time, as eco-nomic headwinds were likely to diminish only slowly.  Other factors besides those headwinds were also men-tioned as possibly providing a rationale for maintaining a low trajectory for the federal funds rate, including following through on a commitment to support the economy by maintaining more-accommodative policy for longer.  These or other modifications to the for-ward guidance for the federal funds rate could be im-plemented in the future, either to improve clarity or to add to policy accommodation, perhaps in conjunction with a reduction in the pace of asset purchases as part of a rebalancing of the Committee's tools. Participants also discussed a range of possible actions that could be considered if the Committee wished to signal its intention to keep short-term rates low or rein-force the forward guidance on the federal funds rate.  For example, most participants thought that a reduc-tion by the Board of Governors in the interest rate paid on excess reserves could be worth considering at some stage, although the benefits of such a step were general-ly seen as likely to be small except possibly as a signal of policy intentions.  By contrast, participants ex-pressed a range of concerns about using open market operations aimed at affecting the expected path of short-term interest rates, such as a standing purchase facility for shorter-term Treasury securities or the pro-vision of term funding through repurchase agreements.  Among the concerns voiced was that such operations would inhibit price discovery and remove valuable sources of market information; in addition, such opera-tions might be difficult to explain to the public, com-plicate the Committee's communications, and appear inconsistent with the economic thresholds for the fed-eral funds rate.  Nevertheless, a number of participants noted that such operations were worthy of further study or saw them as potentially helpful in some cir-cumstances.  At the end of the discussion, participants agreed that it would be helpful to continue reviewing these issues of longer-run policy strategy at upcoming meetings.  No decisions on the substance were taken, and participants generally noted the usefulness of planning for various contingencies. Committee Policy Action Committee members saw the information received over the intermeeting period as suggesting that eco-nomic activity was continuing to expand at a moderate pace.  Although indicators of labor market conditions had shown some further improvement, the unemploy-ment rate remained elevated.  Household spending and business fixed investment advanced, but the recovery in the housing sector slowed somewhat in recent months, and fiscal policy was restraining economic growth.  The Committee expected that, with appropri-ate policy accommodation, economic growth would pick up from its recent pace, resulting in a gradual de-cline in the unemployment rate toward levels consistent with the Committee's dual mandate.  Members general-ly continued to see the downside risks to the outlook for the economy and the labor market as having dimin-ished, on net, since last fall.  Inflation was running be-low the Committee's longer-run objective, but longer-term inflation expectations were stable, and the Com-mittee anticipated that inflation would move back to-ward its objective over the medium term.  Members recognized, however, that inflation persistently below the Committee's 2 percent objective could pose risks to economic performance. In their discussion of monetary policy for the period ahead, members generally noted that there had been little change in the economic outlook since the Sep-tember meeting, and all members but one again judged that it would be appropriate for the Committee to await more evidence that progress toward its economic ob-jectives would be sustained before adjusting the pace of asset purchases.  In the view of one member, the cu-mulative improvement in the economy indicated that the continued easing of monetary policy at the current pace was no longer necessary.  Many members stressed the data-dependent nature of the current asset purchase program, and some pointed out that, if economic con-ditions warranted, the Committee could decide to slow the pace of purchases at one of its next few meetings.  A couple of members also commented that it would be  important to continue laying the groundwork for such a reduction in pace through public statements and speeches, while emphasizing that the overall stance of monetary policy would remain highly accommodative as needed to meet the Committee's objectives. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee decided to continue adding policy accommodation by purchasing additional MBS at a pace of $40 billion per month and longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of $45 billion per month and to maintain its existing rein-vestment policies.  In addition, the Committee reaf-firmed its intention to keep the target federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and retained its forward guidance that it anticipates that this exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6½ percent, inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee's 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well an-chored. Members also discussed the wording of the policy statement to be issued following the meeting.  In addi-tion to updating its description of the state of the economy, the Committee considered whether to note that the effects of the temporary government shutdown had made economic conditions more difficult to assess, but judged that this might overemphasize the role of the shutdown in the Committee's policy deliberations.  Members noted the improvement in financial condi-tions since the time of the September meeting and agreed that it was appropriate to drop the reference, which was included in the September statement, to the tightening of financial conditions seen over the sum-mer.  Members also discussed whether to add to the forward guidance in the policy statement an indication that the headwinds restraining the economic recovery were likely to abate only gradually, with the federal funds rate target anticipated to remain below its longer-run normal value for a considerable time.  While there was some support for adding this language at some stage, a range of concerns were expressed about includ-ing it at this meeting.  In particular, given its complexi-ty, many members felt that it would be difficult to communicate this point succinctly in the statement.  In addition, there was not complete consensus within the Committee that headwinds were the only explanation for the low expected future path of policy rates. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe-cute transactions in the System Account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive:  Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster maximum employment and price sta-bility.  In particular, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with federal funds trading in a range from 0 to    ¼ percent.  The Committee directs the Desk to undertake open market operations as nec-essary to maintain such conditions.  The Desk is directed to continue purchasing longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of about $45 billion per month and to continue purchasing agency mortgage-backed securi-ties at a pace of about $40 billion per month.  The Committee also directs the Desk to en-gage in dollar roll and coupon swap transac-tions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve's agency mortgage-backed securities transactions.  The Commit-tee directs the Desk to maintain its policy of rolling over maturing Treasury securities into new issues and its policy of reinvesting prin-cipal payments on all agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency    mortgage-backed securities.  The System Open Market Account Manager and the Sec-retary will keep the Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the Sys-tem's balance sheet that could affect the at-tainment over time of the Committee's ob-jectives of maximum employment and price stability.  The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-low to be released at 2:00 p.m.:  Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in September generally suggests that economic activity has continued to expand at a moderate pace.  In-dicators of labor market conditions have shown some further improvement, but the unemployment rate remains elevated.  Avail-able data suggest that household spending and business fixed investment advanced, while the recovery in the housing sector slowed somewhat in recent months.  Fiscal policy is restraining economic growth.  Apart  from fluctuations due to changes in energy prices, inflation has been running below the Committee's longer-run objective, but   longer-term inflation expectations have re-mained stable. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum em-ployment and price stability.  The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy ac-commodation, economic growth will pick up from its recent pace and the unemployment rate will gradually decline toward levels the Committee judges consistent with its dual mandate.  The Committee sees the downside risks to the outlook for the economy and the labor market as having diminished, on net, since last fall.  The Committee recognizes that inflation persistently below its 2 percent objective could pose risks to economic per-formance, but it anticipates that inflation will move back toward its objective over the me-dium term. Taking into account the extent of federal fis-cal retrenchment over the past year, the Committee sees the improvement in eco-nomic activity and labor market conditions since it began its asset purchase program as consistent with growing underlying strength in the broader economy.  However, the Committee decided to await more evidence that progress will be sustained before adjust-ing the pace of its purchases.  Accordingly, the Committee decided to continue purchas-ing additional agency mortgage-backed secu-rities at a pace of $40 billion per month and longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of $45 billion per month.  The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed se-curities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securi-ties at auction.  Taken together, these actions should maintain downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, support mortgage markets, and help to make broader financial conditions more accommodative, which in turn should promote a stronger economic recovery and help to ensure that inflation, over time, is at the rate most consistent with the Committee's dual mandate. The Committee will closely monitor incom-ing information on economic and financial developments in coming months and will continue its purchases of Treasury and agen-cy mortgage-backed securities, and employ its other policy tools as appropriate, until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in a context of price stability.  In judging when to moderate the pace of asset purchases, the Committee will, at its coming meetings, assess whether incoming infor-mation continues to support the Commit-tee's expectation of ongoing improvement in labor market conditions and inflation moving back toward its longer-run objective.  Asset purchases are not on a preset course, and the Committee's decisions about their pace will remain contingent on the Committee's eco-nomic outlook as well as its assessment of the likely efficacy and costs of such purchas-es. To support continued progress toward max-imum employment and price stability, the Committee today reaffirmed its view that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will remain appropriate for a consider-able time after the asset purchase program ends and the economic recovery strengthens.  In particular, the Committee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at  0 to ¼ percent and currently anticipates that this exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above  6½ percent, inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee's 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well an-chored.  In determining how long to main-tain a highly accommodative stance of mone-tary policy, the Committee will also consider other information, including additional measures of labor market conditions, indica-tors of inflation pressures and inflation ex-pectations, and readings on financial devel-opments.  When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employ-ment and inflation of 2 percent.   Voting for this action:  Ben Bernanke, William C. Dudley, James Bullard, Charles L. Evans, Jerome H. Powell, Eric Rosengren, Jeremy C. Stein, Daniel K. Tarullo, and Janet L. Yellen. Voting against this action:  Esther L. George. Ms. George dissented because she did not see the con-tinued aggressive easing of monetary policy as warrant-ed in the face of both actual and forecasted improve-ments in the economy.  In her view, the cumulative progress in labor markets justified taking steps toward slowing the pace of the Committee's asset purchas-es.  Moreover, market expectations for the size of the purchase program had continued to escalate despite that progress, increasing her concerns about communi-cations challenges and the potential costs associated with asset purchases. It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on TuesdayŒWednesday, December 17Œ18, 2013.  The meeting adjourned at 12:05 p.m. on Oc-tober 30, 2013. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on October 8, 2013, the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the FOMC meeting held on September 17Œ18, 2013. Videoconference meeting of October 16 On October 16, 2013, the Committee met by video-conference to discuss issues associated with contingen-cies in the event that the Treasury was temporarily un-able to meet its obligations because the statutory feder-al debt limit was not raised.  The meeting covered is-sues similar to those discussed at the Committee's vid-eoconference meeting of August 1, 2011.  The staff provided an update on legislative developments bearing on the debt ceiling and the funding of the federal gov-ernment, recent conditions in financial markets, tech-nical aspects of the processing of federal payments, potential implications for bank supervision and regula-tory policies, and possible actions that the Federal Re-serve could take if disruptions to market functioning posed a threat to the Federal Reserve's economic ob-jectives.  Meeting participants saw no legal or opera-tional need in the event of delayed payments on Treas-ury securities to make changes to the conduct or pro-cedures employed in currently authorized Desk opera-tions, such as open market operations, large-scale asset purchases, or securities lending, or to the operation of the discount window.  They also generally agreed that the Federal Reserve would continue to employ prevail-ing market values of securities in all its transactions and operations, under the usual terms.  With respect to po-tential additional actions, participants noted that the appropriate responses would depend importantly on the actual conditions observed in financial markets.  Under certain circumstances, the Desk might act to facilitate the smooth transmission of monetary policy through money markets and to address disruptions in market functioning and liquidity.  Supervisory policy would take into account and make appropriate allow-ance for unusual market conditions.  The need to main-tain the traditional separation of the Federal Reserve's actions from the Treasury's debt management decisions was noted.  Participants agreed that while the Federal Reserve should take whatever steps it could, the risks posed to the financial system and to the broader econ-omy by a delay in payments on Treasury securities would be potentially catastrophic, and thus such a situ-ation should be avoided at all costs.   _____________________________ William B. English Secretary 